From the Clear Meaning, the sixth generation of the mind of awakening. 1-64
The sixth bhūmi, The Manifest, is explained in four parts: the definition of the bhūmi and the superiority of the perfection of wisdom, the praise of the perfection of wisdom, the explanation of the suchness seen in profound dependent origination, and the conclusion expressing the qualities of the bhūmi.
On the fifth ground, bodhisattvas attain the completely pure perfection of meditative concentration. On the sixth ground, they are called 'approaching' because they dwell in a state of mind that is supremely concentrated. On the basis of that, bodhisattvas dwelling on the sixth ground see the profound suchness of dependent arising, which is merely the conditionality of phenomena. They dwell in the supreme perfection of wisdom and thus attain cessation. Before that, on the fifth ground and so on, they do not attain cessation, because they do not have the supreme perfection of wisdom. The five perfections of generosity and so on are not sufficient to attain cessation.
Because they have directly realized the true nature of phenomena, which is like a reflection, due to their superior insight, because they focus on the truth of the path on the fifth level, and because they are approaching the attainment of the qualities of perfect buddhahood, this level is called The Radiant.
As for the meaning of the second reason, the Autocommentary explains it as the actualization of the path that does not apprehend consciousness and the object of consciousness. However, since the fifth level focuses on the truth of the path, and since the last of the four truths is mentioned, the sixth level is the perfection of the wisdom that is skilled in the four truths. This is because on the fifth level one attains skill in the coarse and subtle aspects of the four truths. The first reason refers to the perfection of the training in wisdom that is skilled in the forward and reverse sequences of dependent origination. Thus, through the perfection of these two trainings in wisdom, one actualizes the truths and dependent origination.
Thus, on this ground, the three trainings in wisdom are perfected, and to the extent that calm abiding is perfected, so too is insight. On the fifth ground, the perfection of meditative concentration is perfected, and on the basis of that, here, the perfection of wisdom is perfected. Therefore, it is from this ground that the unique meditative absorption of cessation is attained.
The Ratnāvalī also says: The sixth is called the forward-facing, Because it faces the Buddha Dharma. Through familiarization with calm abiding and special insight, One attains cessation and thus becomes expansive. As the maturation of that, One becomes a king of the gods in the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations. Because he cannot be outshone by śrāvakas, He pacifies those with excessive pride. The Heaven of Delighting in Emanations is the Heaven of Enjoying Emanations.
Second, the following verse is stated to show that the accumulations of generosity and so forth, which are other than the perfection of wisdom, depend on the perfection of wisdom for reaching the resultant ground. Just as a single person with sight can easily lead a whole group of blind people to the place they wish to go, in the same way, on this path, the perfection of wisdom, too, takes the qualities of generosity and so forth, which are like blind people lacking the eye of insight, and leads them to the state of the victorious ones, which is the resultant ground. This is because the perfection of wisdom sees unerringly both the correct and incorrect paths.
The Noble Condensed Perfection of Wisdom also says: "How could a billion blind people without a guide Enter a city, not knowing the path? Without wisdom, these five perfections without eyes Cannot touch enlightenment without a guide." And the Diamond Cutter also says: "Just as a person with eyes who has entered darkness does not see anything, so should one view a bodhisattva who has fallen into entities and gives gifts. Subhūti, just as a person with eyes sees various forms when the sun rises at dawn, so should one view a bodhisattva who has not fallen into entities and gives gifts. " And the same applies to discipline and so forth.
The third has five parts: (1) the promise to explain the profound meaning, (2) identifying the vessel for explaining the profound meaning, (3) how qualities arise when it is explained to such a vessel, (4) urging to listen to the one who has such a vessel, and (5) how to explain the suchness of dependent origination.
First, it may be asked, "When the sixth bhūmi bodhisattva previously saw dependent origination, how did he see the suchness of 'this arises in dependence upon that'?" In response to this, the commentary states: "The nature of that [suchness] does not fall within the scope of us who have our eyes of mind completely covered by the thick cataract of ignorance. It is within the scope of those who abide on the higher bhūmis, such as the sixth bhūmi. Therefore, it is not something to be asked about by us. Rather, it should be asked of the buddhas and bodhisattvas who have applied the eye medicine of the vision of emptiness to their eyes of mind, which are free from the cataract of ignorance.
If someone asks about the direct realization of suchness, they should be told to ask those who have attained it. Just as applying eye medicine makes the eyes clearer, not extracting them, so applying the eye medicine of emptiness makes the eye of the mind clearer, not extracting the eye of wisdom. If one understands this, one will not be tainted by the bad view that denigrates the noble ones' meditative equipoise by saying that there is no wisdom there. One might object that in the Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras, the Sūtrālaṃkāra, and other such texts, it is said that bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom see the suchness of dependent origination. Therefore, one should explain it following the scriptures. However, since it is difficult to ascertain the intention of the scriptures, someone like me cannot teach suchness even on the basis of the scriptures.
This is said in terms of independent explanation. However, having seen that the treatises that teach reality were composed by authoritative persons and that they explain the scriptures unerringly, one can understand that the scriptures' intention can be ascertained. As the sixth bhūmi bodhisattva understands the profound Dharma that is extremely profound, Ārya Nāgārjuna understood the scriptures unerringly. In his Madhyamaka treatises, he taught the essential nature of phenomena not only with scriptural authority but also with reasoning. Therefore, just as reality is taught in the system of Ārya Nāgārjuna, I will explain it in accordance with the system taught by Nāgārjuna, as it is explained by Candrakīrti.
If one asks how the noble Nāgārjuna has unmistakenly ascertained the meaning of the definitive scriptures, it is known from the scriptures. As the Descent into Laṅkā Sūtra says: In the south, in the land of Vidarbha, There will be a monk of great renown, Glorious, named Nāga, Who will destroy the positions of existence and nonexistence. He will teach in the world my vehicle, The unsurpassed Great Vehicle, And, having attained the ground of Perfect Joy, He will go to Sukhāvatī. Thus, it is said that Nāgārjuna will comment on the definitive vehicle, which is free from the two extremes of existence and nonexistence.
This is explained in the Golden Light Sūtra. It is the same person who was the Licchavi youth Sarva­loka­priya at the time of the Teacher's presence. In the Great Cloud Sūtra it is said: "Four hundred years after I have passed into nirvāṇa, this youth will become a monk named Nāga and spread my doctrine. Finally, he will become a victor named Jñānasambhava­prabha in the realm called Praśānta­prabha." Therefore, it is established that this person has an unerring certainty in the definitive meaning of the scriptures.
The Mañjuśrīnāmasamgīti also describes the time of his appearance and his name as similar to those of Maitreya, and states that he will live for six hundred years. The Mahādundubhi Sūtra states that the Licchavi youth Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana will become a monk bearing the name of the Teacher at the time when the doctrine is declining eighty years after the Teacher has passed away. He will spread the doctrine and will pass away after one hundred years and be reborn in Sukhāvatī. The elder Bodhibhadra and the great master Atiśa both consider this to be a prophecy of this master. This is based on the explanation that the Licchavi Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana and Nāgārjuna are one and the same person. The Mahādundubhi Sūtra explains that this monk is a seventh-ground bodhisattva. Such explanations do not contradict the previous ones, because there are many such cases in the scriptures, such as the explanation in some scriptures that the great king Udayana was a stream-enterer and the explanation in other scriptures that he was a buddha.
The definitive meaning of the teachings should be relied upon by those whose mind streams have previously been habituated to and have had the seed of the realization of emptiness planted in them. It should not be relied upon by others, for even if they were to listen to the texts that teach emptiness, they would have a wrong understanding of emptiness and would therefore be in great danger of misunderstanding it.
The way in which great misfortune will befall them is that sometimes, due to their lack of skill, they will abandon emptiness and go to the lower realms. Sometimes, they will mistakenly grasp at the meaning of emptiness, which is the lack of inherent existence, thinking that phenomena do not exist at all and are nonexistent. They will first generate the wrong view that denies all things that are causes and effects. Then, without abandoning that wrong view, they will make it grow more and more.
As the Clear Words commentary on the verse "Those of little wisdom are ruined by wrongly viewing emptiness" says: "Those of little wisdom are ruined by wrongly viewing emptiness" means that they do not fall into the extreme of denying the conventional. This requires that they not damage the relationship between actions and results, which is like a reflection. "Those of little wisdom are ruined by wrongly viewing emptiness" means that they do not fall into the extreme of reifying the ultimate. This requires that they see the relationship between actions and results only in the absence of intrinsic existence. It is explained that the opposite of these two is falling into the extremes of eternalism and nihilism. Since it is said that one has wrong views if one thinks that compounded phenomena do not exist, there is no difference at all between the words "nonexistent" and "not existing," or between the words "nonexistent" and "not existing." So even if one focuses one's mind carefully on the idea of nonexistence, there is no difference at all.
The Catuḥśataka says: One goes to the lower realms, The other to peace, not the ordinary kind. In the commentary on this, it is explained that both go to the lower realms: "The wicked one who listens to the teaching on selflessness, by misunderstanding and misinterpreting it, goes only to the lower realms." Misunderstanding it means taking the meaning of emptiness to be the meaning of nonexistence. Therefore, those who lack the power of mind to distinguish the extremely subtle meaning, yet have the pride of thinking they understand it, and who have a strong-seeming devotion to the words of the profound meaning that are beyond their capacity, will be led to great misfortune. Therefore, one should be cautious about these points. How is it that emptiness should be taught to them?
How can one be certain that this person should not be taught emptiness? This can be ascertained by means of external signs. When ordinary beings, who are beginners, hear an unmistaken discussion of emptiness, they will experience joy upon hearing it, and this joy will cause their eyes to fill with tears and their body hairs to stand on end. In such a person there is a seed of the nonconceptual wisdom of perfect buddhahood, which is the seed of the realization of emptiness. Such a person is a suitable vessel for the teaching of the ultimate truth, which will be explained below.
If these signs of the body appear when one has heard the unmistaken teaching on emptiness and one is not obtuse, these are unmistakable signs. If one does not understand the teaching or if one understands it but these signs do not appear, one cannot be certain for the time being that one is a vessel for the profound teaching. However, if one does not transgress the instructions of the holy lama, one can become a vessel for the new installation of many potentials for understanding emptiness.
The third is as follows. The teaching of emptiness to the listener described above will not be fruitless. Why is this? It is because the listener will not only not be led to the undesirable consequences of the mistaken grasping at emptiness, but also the qualities that are the fruits of listening to the view of emptiness will arise.
How does this occur? Those who are suitable vessels for the view of emptiness think that hearing the view of emptiness is like finding a treasure. In order to prevent the view from being lost in future lives, they will always take up and maintain perfect discipline. They think, "If I fall into the lower realms due to having broken my discipline, the view of emptiness will be lost." Thus, they take up discipline and maintain it without breaking it. For those who have broken their discipline, it is not necessary to have previously taken up discipline. Rather, they have broken their discipline by committing naturally negative actions that are incompatible with discipline. They think, "If I am born in the higher realms but am poor and lack the necessities of life such as food, drink, medicine, and clothing, I will be so busy trying to obtain them that I will lose the opportunity to hear the view of emptiness and to meditate on its meaning." Thus, they give gifts to the appropriate recipients as previously explained.
Thinking, 'The view of emptiness, when imbued with the great compassion explained above, leads to buddhahood, but not otherwise,' they cultivate the root of great compassion. Anger leads to rebirth in the lower realms and destroys virtue, and it causes one to obtain an extremely ugly complexion. Therefore, thinking, 'The noble ones will not be pleased with me because of that,' they cultivate patience. If the discipline and so forth are not dedicated to omniscience, they will not become causes for attaining buddhahood and will not produce an uninterrupted stream of immeasurable results, such as a body and enjoyments. Therefore, they dedicate the virtue of that discipline and so forth to the liberation of beings from saṃsāra.
Seeing that no one else, such as the hearers and solitary realizers, is able to teach the profound dependent origination as bodhisattvas do, they will develop great respect for bodhisattvas who are on the path to perfect enlightenment. For Mahayana practitioners who have correctly understood the view of emptiness, the pure understanding described above will arise, and they will develop great respect for the practice of the vast aspects of the path. This is a highly praiseworthy state. As the Bodhicittavivaraṇa says: Knowing that phenomena are empty And still maintaining the connection between actions and their results Is more amazing than amazing, More wonderful than wonderful. There are two types of unsuitable vessels: those who do not believe and reject [the teachings] and those who have a superficial belief but have misunderstood the reasoning and think that all causes and effects are refuted. The correct understanding is to have a view of emptiness that is free from inherent existence and to understand that all actions and their results are still valid.
If it were not so, then when one takes the view that the teachings of the sūtras are definitive, all the presentations of the results of actions such as discipline and so forth become like counting the hairs on a rabbit's horns. Such a view is for those who have not understood the definitive meaning, but is not necessary for those who have understood the definitive meaning. They think that all of those are fabrications of conceptual thought, and that all conceptual thought is the grasping at signs of truth-habit. They destroy all virtue, like the Chinese Hva san.
Some say that in the perspective of delusion, one should engage in adopting and rejecting for a while. However, if one takes the conceptual thoughts to be either with or without grasping at true existence, then the reasoning that refutes inherent existence will refute all objects, which is absurd. If one does not make this distinction, then the conceptual thoughts of the view and the conduct will be mutually destructive, like heat and cold. Moreover, the perspective of delusion in which the object is posited, the one who posits it, and the object posited are all without a basis for positing them. To say this is to be enveloped in darkness. Therefore, one should take the side of the earlier texts.
As explained above, those who are wise in the ways of the profound and the vast will, over a long period of time and without interruption, definitely gather the accumulations of virtue in the profound and vast fields on the level of ordinary beings. They will then gradually attain the level of Perfect Joy. Therefore, those who wish to attain the level of Perfect Joy should listen to this profound path that will be explained.
As the Catuḥśatakaṭīkā says: If they are interested in the teaching of emptiness of intrinsic existence, one should act in such a way as to increase their interest in emptiness by providing them with the appropriate conditions. They should be made to have great compassion, to be grateful to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, and to avoid the causes of the great abyss of obstacles to the sacred Dharma. They should be made to give up fear and to give up what is difficult to give. They should be gathered by the four means of gathering disciples. With all one's efforts, one should teach this sacred Dharma to those who are vessels of the sacred Dharma. This statement shows that one should teach this Dharma with great effort to those who are free from the two faults of being an unsuitable vessel. Even to those who have interest but do not understand it exactly, one should teach it by using methods that do not harm their understanding of dependent origination.
The merit of a teacher who is well versed in the subject matter teaching it to a listener who is a suitable vessel, even if he is the lowest kind, is very great. As the Compendium of Sutras says: "Devotion to the profound Dharma gathers all merit. Until one attains buddhahood, it will bring about all the excellence of the world and beyond. As the sutra The Gift of the Precious Child says: 'Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who lacks skillful means and practices the six perfections for a hundred thousand eons will create more merit than that if he listens to this Dharma teaching with doubt. What need is there to mention listening without doubt? What need is there to mention writing it down, reciting it, and teaching it extensively to others?'"
The Vajracchedikā also says, "The Blessed One said, 'Subhūti, what do you think? If there were as many Ganges rivers as there are grains of sand in the Ganges, would the grains of sand in those Ganges rivers be many?' Subhūti replied, 'Blessed One, the Ganges rivers themselves would be many, so what need is there to mention the grains of sand in those rivers?' The Blessed One said, 'I tell you, Subhūti, you should understand this. If a man or woman were to fill as many world systems as there are grains of sand in those Ganges rivers with the seven precious substances and offer them to the Tathāgata, would that man or woman generate a great deal of merit from that action?' Subhūti replied, 'Blessed One, it would be a great deal. Well-Gone One, it would be a great deal.'
The Blessed One replied, "If someone were to memorize even a single four-line verse from this Dharma teaching and teach it to others, they would generate much more merit than that." And in the Sūtra of the Treasure of the Tathāgatas, after listing the ten great nonvirtuous actions, it is said, "A person who possesses these and who understands the Dharma of selflessness and has faith and conviction that all phenomena are primordially pure will not go to the lower realms." And in the Chapter on Subduing Māra, it is said, "If a monk understands that all phenomena are completely tamed and that the initial limit of faults is naturally void, and if he dispels regret for faults and does not make them permanent, he will overcome even the heinous crimes. What need is there to mention minor transgressions of discipline and conduct?" And in the Sūtra of Ajātaśatru, it is said, "If someone who has committed a heinous crime hears this sacred Dharma and understands it, I do not say that this action is an obscuration of karma." These are the benefits of teaching and listening to the Dharma, and of having faith and reflecting on the profound meaning at other times.
To obtain the benefits of teaching properly, two things are necessary: a pure motivation that does not seek gain, honor, or fame, and an accurate explanation of the Dharma that is not a misinterpretation of the meaning of the teaching. If one teaches with either of these two faults or both, it is said to be an obstacle to great merit. As the master Vasubandhu said: Therefore, those who teach the Dharma incorrectly or who teach with a mind afflicted by desire for gain, honor, or fame are causing themselves to lose great merit. This is also true here. Since it is also important for the listener to have a pure motivation and not to misunderstand the meaning, both teacher and student should have at least the minimum qualifications when teaching and listening. This section has three parts: how the meaning of reality is taught by scriptural authority, how the meaning of scriptural authority is established by reasoning, and how the divisions of emptiness are established by that reasoning. The first of these has two parts: how it is taught in the scriptures and identifying the counteragents to knowing suchness.
The first is described in the Sūtra of the Ten Grounds: When the bodhisattva on the fifth ground enters the sixth ground, he does so through ten types of sameness of phenomena. What are these ten? They are as follows: the sameness of all phenomena in being without characteristics; the sameness of all phenomena in being without marks; the sameness of all phenomena in being unborn; the sameness of all phenomena in being unarisen; the sameness of all phenomena in being void; the sameness of all phenomena in being primordially pure; the sameness of all phenomena in being without elaboration; the sameness of all phenomena in being without acceptance and rejection; the sameness of all phenomena in being like illusions, dreams, optical illusions, echoes, the moon in water, reflections, and emanations; and the sameness of all phenomena in being without duality of existence and nonexistence. When he realizes the nature of all phenomena in this way, he attains the sixth bodhisattva ground, The Manifest, through sharp and harmonious acceptance. The phrase 'in the same way' is to be applied to all the other samenesses up to 'without acceptance and rejection.' The samenesses of the first two are to be taken as one, and the samenesses of the next seven are to be taken as one, as are the last two. The identification of the ten samenesses in the commentary on the Sūtra of the Ten Grounds and in the Bodhisattva Levels are not in agreement. Since the way of explaining emptiness in those two texts is not the same as in this system, it is explained differently here. The first sameness is the sameness of all phenomena in the noble ones' equipoise in the absence of dissimilar characteristics.
All phenomena are equal in lacking intrinsic existence. These two are general teachings. The other eight are specific teachings that elaborate on the meaning of the general teachings. The absence of arising refers to the future, and the absence of birth refers to the other two times. The equality or similarity of all phenomena should also be understood in relation to the other [teachings]. The absence of birth refers to the absence of that which is to arise and that which has arisen. This is also the absence of intrinsic existence, as explained in the context of the second equality. This is not something that has been made so by scripture and reasoning, but rather something that has been pure from the beginning. The seventh is the absence of elaborations of dualistic appearances, which should be understood in relation to the first [equality]. The eighth should also be understood in relation to that distinction. The ninth is the many examples that establish the meaning of the previous points. The tenth is the equality of all phenomena in lacking intrinsic existence as entities or nonentities. Sharpness is swift insight. Compatibility refers to the compatibility with the acceptance of the nonarising of phenomena on the eighth bhūmi. Although there are many scriptures that teach the suchness of phenomena, here the author cites the teaching from the section on how the insight of the sixth bhūmi realizes suchness.
If one does not understand well how phenomena are truly established and how they are grasped as true, one will certainly err in the view of suchness. As it is said in the Caryāsaṃgraha: Without touching the imagined thing, One does not grasp its nonexistence. This means that if one does not clearly visualize the object of refutation, the imagined thing, one cannot grasp well its nonexistence. Therefore, if one does not visualize well the object of refutation, the truly established, and the way it is grasped by the mind, one cannot grasp well the nature of truthlessness and emptiness. Since it is not enough to merely identify the temporary truth habit and grasping at truth fabricated by philosophical systems, it is very important to identify the innate grasping at truth and the truly established that have operated since beginningless time and that are present in both those whose minds have been affected by philosophical systems and those whose minds have not been affected by philosophical systems. To do this, one must know how to apply the arguments to the refutation of the object of grasping at truth. This is not enough, however, to refute the innate grasping at truth. Therefore, one must understand how to identify the innate grasping at truth. This is explained in three parts: identifying the truly established and grasping at truth, showing by the example of illusion what is true and what is false in relation to the world, and applying the example to the meaning.
The first is as follows. In other reliable texts of the Svatantrika Madhyamikas, the identification of the object of refutation does not occur clearly. In the Madhyamakaloka, the opposite of the way in which conventional existence is explained is understood to be ultimate existence or true existence. Therefore, when that text says: "The mistaken awareness that superimposes existence upon things that are actually devoid of inherent existence is called the conventional truth. It is called conventional because it obscures reality, or because it covers it up." The statement "because it arises from that" refers to the mistaken awareness that superimposes true existence. The statement "because it is seen by all living beings" refers to the fact that this mistaken awareness is innate. The statement "because of the thoughts of all living beings" refers not only to conceptual thought but also to nonconceptual awareness. The statement "all things that exist only conventionally, not ultimately" refers to the fact that things exist only conventionally, not ultimately, not that they exist only conventionally in the sense of being grasped by the innate grasping at true existence. Thus, existence that is not posited by the power of awareness but is instead the thing's own mode of being is ultimate existence, true existence, and correct existence. Grasping at such existence is the innate grasping at true existence.
In the case of the statement in the Light of the Middle Way that “ultimately, there is no arising,” the implication is that “this is explained as not established by correct cognition.” How is it that ultimately existent and ultimately arising are explained as established by the rational cognition that engages reality? This is true. There are two types of ultimate that must be understood in the context of qualifying the object of negation with the term ultimate. One is the ultimate that is taken to be the rational cognition of hearing, thinking, and meditating. In this sense, it is not established as explained above. The other is the ultimate that exists as the mode of subsistence of the object, not posited by the power of awareness. In the first sense, there is both ultimate existence and establishment in the ultimate. In the second sense, both ultimate existence and existence in the ultimate are impossible. Therefore, although the first sense of ultimate existence entails the second sense of ultimate existence, the apprehension of the first sense of ultimate existence is not the innate apprehension of true existence. The apprehension of true existence in the second sense of ultimate existence is necessary for the apprehension of true existence. If this is understood well, one will understand the key points that do not contradict the statements that the mode of subsistence and the ultimate do not exist and that the ultimate nature exists and is the mode of subsistence and the ultimate.
To understand how existence is posited by the mind and how it is not posited, one must understand it in terms of the example of illusion. If one explains this example, it is as follows. When a magician conjures up a horse or an elephant from a stone or a piece of wood, there are three people present: the magician, the spectators whose vision has been affected by the illusion, and those whose vision has not been affected. For the first, there is only the appearance of a horse or an elephant, but no conception of it. For the second, there is both the appearance and the conception. For the third, there is neither the appearance nor the conception of a horse or an elephant. When the basis of the illusion appears as a horse or an elephant, it is like the following example. When one mistakes a rope for a snake, one says that the rope is a snake in the context of that mistaken cognition, but not in general. Similarly, one cannot say that the basis of the illusion appears as a horse or an elephant in the context of mistaken cognition, but not in general. Rather, one must accept that the basis of the illusion appears as a horse or an elephant. For the spectators, the appearance of a horse or an elephant does not appear to be posited by the power of their own inner cognition. Instead, they apprehend a real horse or elephant occupying a place in the world.
This is the way of apprehending things as established or not established by the power of the mind on the basis of an example. When a phenomenon appears in that basis, there are two ways in which it can be present: in accordance with how it appears and not in accordance with how it appears. If this is understood well, then when an object of knowledge is established by the power of valid cognition, valid cognition is also a mind, so the establishment of the object of knowledge by that mind is established by the power of the mind. Thus, one will be able to distinguish the two positions that are mixed up in the thought that even according to the systems of the realists, true establishment is refuted, because the establishment of an object of knowledge by the power of valid cognition is the meaning of valid cognition realizing the mode of existence of the two objects of knowledge, so it is completely different from the previous two.
Thus, the appearance of the illusion is established by direct perception of the sense faculties that apprehend the basis, such as the space or the ground, according to the Yogācāra-Mādhyamika, and by autocognition according to the Svatantrika who accepts external objects. The nonexistence of the appearance is refuted by the argument that if it existed in that way, it would be seen by those whose eyes are not affected by the illusion, but it is not seen by them. When the combination of the appearance and its emptiness is established, the falsity is established in relation to the ordinary conventional cognition that does not adhere to philosophical tenets. Therefore, the cognition that establishes the emptiness of the appearance of a reflection is not a coarse or subtle rational cognition. Even if something is truly established in relation to the ordinary conventional cognition, if it appears in one way, it cannot be empty in another. If it is empty in one way, it cannot appear in another. Therefore, when the two are combined, it is only false in relation to the ordinary conventional cognition.
Third, just as people watching an illusion are deceived by their eyes, when sentient beings perceive the external and internal phenomena as if they were truly existent, they apprehend them as having an existence that is not posited by virtue of appearing to the mind. This is the innate grasping at true existence that has been present since beginningless time. The way in which this is posited by the Svatantrikas is very coarse compared to the way in which the Prasangikas apprehend the object of refutation. Therefore, this is not the subtle innate grasping at true existence. When reasoning refutes the true existence grasped by this grasping at true existence, one will, like the magician, no longer apprehend the external and internal phenomena as having an existence that is not posited by virtue of the mind. One will understand that they exist merely by virtue of being posited by the mind. Although the arising of a sprout from a seed is posited by virtue of the mind, it is not contradictory for the sprout to arise from the seed from its own side. This is similar to the appearance of a horse or an elephant in the basis of the illusion. This should be understood for all conventional existents. Since even the ultimate nature is posited as existent by virtue of the mind to which it appears, there is nothing that is not posited as conventionally existent.
Therefore, just as an illusion appears as a horse or an elephant but is empty of that, all phenomena such as pots appear as pots but are empty of pots. This is not at all the meaning of applying the example of an illusion to other phenomena. If it were, it would be impossible for that phenomenon to exist. Also, the application of the example would be an appearance of that but not the actual thing. When nonconceptual wisdom arises in meditative equipoise, all dualistic appearances are pacified in its perspective, like the absence of both the appearance and the clinging to an illusion for someone whose eyes are not affected by the illusion. Since below I will not teach the unique ways in which the Svatantrikas refute with reasoning, here I will briefly and easily explain how, according to their system, all phenomena appear like illusions. Regarding knowable objects, they are limited to being either existent or nonexistent things. First, let us explain things. Things are limited to being either material or immaterial. Regarding material things, one should refute the absence of parts such as east and so on and the absence of temporal parts in consciousness, as explained elsewhere. Then one should establish that things are necessarily part-possessors. Next, one should refute the two—the parts and the part-possessor—having different entities, since they would then be unrelated. They should be taught to have the same entity.
At that time, when one focuses one's mind on it, one should establish that, although the mode of being and the essence are one and the same, the mode of appearance is undeniably different. Thus, one should establish that it is a combination of appearing like an illusion and being empty of that. Then, one should think, "Although there is no contradiction in the false mode of existence that is posited through the power of appearance to the mind, if that basis were a mode of existence that is not posited through the power of appearance to the mind, it would be completely unreasonable. For, as explained before, it is impossible for the mode of appearance and the mode of being to be discordant in something that is truly established. If it were truly established, it would have to abide in all respects without any falsity. And because the mind that perceives the different essences would have to be non-mistaken, it would contradict the single essence."
If that is established, then even the true establishment of non-entities can be refuted on the basis of that reasoning. Even for uncompounded space, one must accept that it pervades some material things. And for that, one must accept a part that pervades the east and parts that pervade other directions. Similarly, even for reality, there are many parts that pervade and many parts that are realized by different earlier and later cognitions. And other uncompounded things are similar to that. Since it is not possible for the parts and the whole to be different entities, they are one entity. That is possible for a falsehood but not for true establishment. Therefore, as before, it is refuted. Thus, all objects of knowledge are established as without true existence. Since this is the view of Śāntarakṣita and his spiritual son, the view that parts and wholes are only entities is a fault of narrow-mindedness. The falsehood that is familiar to those whose minds have not been affected by philosophical systems is not the same as the falsehood accepted by Mādhyamikas. Therefore, it is posited by thought in accordance with what is familiar to them, but in our own system we do not accept that mere postulation by thought.
Thus, although there is no mode of subsistence that is not posited through the force of appearance to awareness, there is no contradiction in this system in positing a mode of subsistence that is not merely nominally imputed. Therefore, there is a great difference in the two Madhyamaka schools in the way they conceive of the object of refutation. Thus, after first guiding the person to this system's identification of truth and the conception of truth, and its reasoning for refuting that, in a concise manner, one will see that the person will be able to distinguish the view well. Therefore, I have explained it in this way.
Second, if one understands how things are posited in this system merely through the power of conceptual thought, one will easily understand the misconception of true existence that is the opposite of that. This has two parts: how things are posited through the power of conceptual thought and the misconception of true existence that is the opposite of that.
The first is stated in the Questions of Upāli Sūtra: "Even the beautiful golden palaces with their open flowers, pleasing to the mind, are not made by anyone. They are established by the power of thought. The world is established by the power of thought." This states that phenomena are established by the power of thought. There are many other statements that all phenomena are merely imputed by thought and are established by the power of thought. The Sixty Reasonings also says: Because the perfect Buddha said that the world is conditioned by ignorance, why is it not reasonable to say that the world is thought? In the commentary on the meaning of this, it is explained that the world is not established by way of its own entity and is merely imputed by thought. The Four Hundred also says: "If desire and so on do not exist without thought, what intelligent person would hold that they are real and thought?" In the commentary on this, it is said: "Those things that exist only when there is thought and do not exist without thought are definitely not established by way of their own entity, just like the snake imputed to a coiled rope." "Real thing" here means established by way of its own entity.
Conception arises in dependence upon that. The commentary states that desire and so forth are like the ascription of a snake to a rope. This is merely an illustration, however, for it is explained that all other phenomena are also posited by conception, like the ascription of a snake to a rope. In this case, when the color and coiling of a rope resembles a snake and the object is not clearly perceived, one thinks, "This is a snake." At that time, there is not the slightest basis for positing the rope or its parts or collections as an instance of a snake. Therefore, the snake is merely imputed by conception. Similarly, when one thinks "I" in dependence upon the aggregates, there is not the slightest basis for positing the collection of past and future moments, the collection of simultaneous moments, or the parts of the aggregates as an instance of the self. This will be explained in detail below. Therefore, since there is not the slightest basis for positing the self as something distinct from the parts and the whole of the aggregates, the self is merely posited in dependence upon the aggregates by conception. It is not established by way of its own nature.
This is also stated in the Ratnāvalī: A person is not earth, not water, Not fire, not wind, not space, Not consciousness, not all of them, So what person is there other than these? Here, "person" refers to the person, the sentient being, the "I," and the "self." "Not earth" up to "not consciousness" refutes positing the person as any of the six constituents of a sentient being. "Not all of them" refutes positing the person as the collection of the constituents. The last line refutes positing the person as something different in nature from the constituents. However, this does not mean that they do not accept the person. Nor do they accept the foundation consciousness and so on as the person. Therefore, as explained by the author of the commentary, the noble Nāgārjuna also accepts the person.
If one understands how the person is posited by conceptual thought in this way, one will understand that all other phenomena are posited by conceptual thought in the same way. As the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sūtra says: Just as you understand the notion of self, apply your mind in the same way to all things. And the Samdhinirmocana Sūtra says: Understand all beings to be like oneself, and understand all phenomena to be like all beings. The Ratnāvalī also says clearly: Just as the person is not real because it is a composite of the six elements, so too are the elements not real because they are composites of their own parts. The meaning of the first line is that the person is imputed in dependence upon a composite of the six elements. The meaning of the third and fourth lines is that since it is impossible for there to be a composite without parts and a whole, the elements are not real because they are imputed in dependence upon a composite of their own parts. The parts and the whole cannot be posited as the basis of the composite, nor can anything that is different from them in nature be the basis of the composite. Although the way that pots and so on are posited by conceptual thought is similar to the way that a rope is imputed to be a snake, the existence or nonexistence of pots and so on and the ability or inability to perform functions are completely different. The way that the conventions are to be ascertained, whether the conventions are to be used, whether there is any harm in using the conventions, and so on are completely different in every way.
The feasibility of the actions of each of these conceptualizations is explained by Buddhapālita, Śāntideva, and this master, who are the only commentators on the two noble father and son texts to explain the system of the two noble father and son texts in an extraordinary way. This is also the most difficult point in the ultimate view of the Middle Way. As the Precious Garland says: Because material things are merely names, even space is merely a name. If there is no element, how can there be material things? Therefore, even names do not exist. Feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, And consciousness are like the elements. They should be viewed as being like the self. Therefore, the six elements are without self. And: Apart from being designated conventionally, what is there in the world that exists or does not exist? Thus, it is said that ultimately there are not even names, and conventionally there is nothing apart from what is merely posited by the power of conventional terms. If these points are understood well, one will understand that all phenomena must be posited in dependence, that they are not established by way of their own nature because they are dependently imputed and dependently arisen, that they do not have an essential nature that is not posited by the power of other phenomena, and that even when phenomena are posited as existent, they are posited without searching for the referent of the term.
The second is the apprehension of existence that is not merely posited by the force of nominal conventions, as explained above. This is the innate apprehension of true existence, ultimate existence, correct establishment, inherent existence, existence by way of its own character, and inherent existence. The referent object of this is the measure of truth in the hypothetical extreme. As for the refutation of the object of negation, it is necessary to understand the two senses of the qualification ultimate. Although the Svatantrika Madhyamikas do not consider the three types of existence to be possible in the world, they do consider the three types of inherent existence to exist conventionally. This is seen as a great skill in leading those who are temporarily unable to easily understand the subtle suchness. Thus, the object of negation is the inherent existence of phenomena that is not posited by the force of conventional conceptual thought. The apprehension of this inherent existence in persons and phenomena is the apprehension of the two selves. As Aryadeva's commentary on the Catuhsataka says: The so-called self is the inherent existence that is not posited by the force of other things. The absence of this is selflessness. This is understood in two ways, according to whether it is applied to phenomena or to persons. This is called the selflessness of phenomena and the selflessness of persons. This text also explains that the two types of selflessness are distinguished not by the object of negation but by the basis of the person or phenomenon.
In the root text, the innate view of the transitory collection that grasps at a self is said to have the aggregates as its object, and in the commentary it is said to have a self imputed in dependence on the aggregates as its object. Therefore, it should be taken as having as its object the mere "I" and the mere person, which are the objects that merely give rise to the thought "I am." As for its aspect, the autocommentary says: "Grasping at an 'I' that does not exist, one imputes the existence of a self and clings to it as real." Thus, it grasps at the "I" as truly existent. Furthermore, the autocommentary says: "The view of the transitory collection is an afflicted intelligence that operates in the form of 'I' and 'mine.'" As this indicates, the innate view of the transitory collection must arise spontaneously in relation to the thought "I am." Therefore, the innate apprehension of a person in another continuum as existing by way of its own characteristics is an innate apprehension of a self of persons, but it is not an innate view of the transitory collection. The phrase "operating in the form of 'I' and 'mine'" does not indicate that the two are objects of the mode of apprehension. Rather, it indicates that they are apprehended as existing by way of their own characteristics.
The object of the innate view of the transitory collection that grasps at 'mine' is 'mine' itself, and not one's own eyes and so on. The aspect is to apprehend that object and then to grasp at 'mine' as existing by way of its own intrinsic character. One might wonder, "Well then, how is it that the autocommentary says: 'This is mine' refers to attachment to all aspects of entities other than the object of the thought 'I am.' This is the grasping at 'mine' that is the attachment to the thought 'This is mine' in relation to the basis of the eyes and so on." This refers to the grasping at the eyes and so on as 'mine' and the attachment to 'mine' as truly existent, and does not indicate that the eyes and so on are the basis of the identity of 'mine.' Otherwise, the view of the transitory collection and the grasping at the self of phenomena would not be mutually exclusive.
The object of the innate grasping at a self of phenomena is the aggregates of form and so on, the eyes, ears, and so on, and the environment, which is not included in the continuum of a person. The mode is as explained above. Such grasping at the two selves is the ignorance that binds one in cyclic existence. As the Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness says: The Teacher said that ignorance is the conception That things born from causes and conditions are real. From that arise the twelve links. Thus it is said that the grasping at the reality of phenomena is the ignorance that is the root of cyclic existence. From that arises the ignorance that is the grasping at a self of persons. Therefore it is said that from that arise the twelve links. To reverse that ignorance, one must see that it is empty of the way it is grasped and that it lacks the self that it grasps. As the Praise to the Dharmadhātu says: When one sees the lack of self in objects, The seed of existence is destroyed. And: Therefore, all afflictions are destroyed When delusion is destroyed. When one sees dependent origination, Delusion does not arise. Therefore, one should explain only this teaching with all one's effort.
Since this statement is in the context of identifying the delusion that is one of the three poisons, it is afflicted ignorance. It is said that to reverse that ignorance, one must realize the profound meaning of dependent origination, which is the meaning of emptiness as dependent origination. The commentator also says that yogis should stop the self, indicating that one must realize selflessness by refuting the object of self-grasping. Therefore, even if one merely withdraws the mind from its object without refuting the object of self-grasping, one cannot enter into selflessness. This is because when the mind engages an object, there are three types of engagement: one that grasps the object as truly existent, one that grasps it as not truly existent, and one that does not qualify it in either way. So even if one does not grasp the object as truly existent, one can still grasp it. Refuting and proving the object in a way that does not identify the object of one's error is like searching for a thief's tracks in the wrong place. If one identifies the grasping at true existence well, one will understand that there are many thoughts that are neither of the two types of self-grasping. This will reverse the misconception that all objects grasped by thought should be refuted by the reasoning that analyzes suchness. Although there are many points to be explained in this context, some have already been explained in many other places, and some will be explained below, so I will not elaborate on them here.
The second has two parts: establishing the selflessness of phenomena through reasoning and establishing the selflessness of persons through reasoning. The first has four parts: refuting the four extremes of production in both truths, rebutting objections to the refutation, how the dependent arising of production itself refutes the misconception of extremes, and identifying the result of analyzing with reasoning. The first has three parts: stating the thesis that there is no inherently existent production, presenting the arguments that establish that through reasoning, and the meaning established by refuting the four extremes of production.
The first of these is as follows. From among the ten equalities explained above, the noble Nāgārjuna, thinking that it would be easy to explain the other equalities of phenomena if he first taught the equality of the absence of inherent arising through reasoning, stated in the beginning of his treatise on the Middle Way: "Neither from itself, nor from another, Nor from both, nor without a cause, Do any things, anywhere, ever arise." "Never" and "at no time" are synonyms. The phrase "anywhere" is a synonym for "in any way." The phrase "in any way" is a phrase that indicates the basis of nonarising. It is a phrase that indicates the place, time, and philosophical system.
The words that are based on the sounds of those who do not arise in those three bases are words that express internal and external things. Therefore, the meaning of the text that begins with the words 'from self' should be explained as follows: 'It is not possible that internal and external things arise from self in any place, time, or philosophical system.' Similarly, the other three theses should be applied as follows: 'It is not possible that things arise from other, from both, or without cause.' Although the Prasannapadā translates 'from self' as 'from things,' this translation is better. One might think that it is like the fact that saffron does not grow in some places, or that crops do not grow in some times. But the words 'in any place or time' refute this. Therefore, the words 'in any philosophical system' do not mean that things do not arise in the systems of the realists. The autocommentary explains: Here, the words 'it is not' are connected with 'arising from self,' which is a proof of existence. They are not connected with existence itself, because its refutation is implied. The words 'in any philosophical system' should be connected with the refutation of inherent arising, and not with the refutation of arising in general. This is because if the four types of arising are refuted, the refutation of inherent arising is implied.
Therefore, it is not that, as explained in the Madhyamakāloka, one cannot use the refutation of the four extremes of production as a reason to prove the absence of intrinsic production. Rather, it means that the text does not teach that one should refute the four extremes one by one. As the Prasannapadā says, "It is not by accepting the four alternatives that we accept the conventional existence of things, for that would lead to the acceptance of intrinsic existence of things." Thus, production from other is not a term of the scriptures but a term of the philosophers. And since it is used with reference to intrinsically identifiable otherness, if one accepts it, one will end up accepting intrinsic existence. Therefore, in this system, production from other does not exist even conventionally. Although cause and effect are accepted as different entities conventionally, this does not mean that they are produced from other. For, as it is said that each phenomenon has two natures conventionally, although there is an established nature, it is not accepted as intrinsically produced.
The Prasannapadā explains that the thesis that things are not produced from themselves is an absolute negation. This is similar for the other three theses. Therefore, when establishing the absence of intrinsic existence, the object of refutation is a nonimplicative negation that is the mere elimination of the object of refutation. As the Prasannapadā says: All the words in the world, such as “nonexistence” and “nothing,” are said to be nonimplicative negations. Therefore, the meaning of “nonexistence” is the absence of intrinsic existence. The autocommentary says, “Having repeated these four theses, I will now explain how to establish them through reasoning.” And later, having used arguments to refute the opponent’s thesis that things exist intrinsically, it says, “Therefore, production does not exist.” The Prasannapadā also says, “Because our inferences have the sole effect of refuting the theses of others, we do not establish nonexistence or existence. We refute the reification of existence and the reification of nonexistence by others. We wish to establish the middle path that eliminates the two extremes.” This means that we refute only the extremes of existence and nonexistence that others posit. We do not establish anything else.
It is not that they do not establish the mere negation of the two extremes, for they teach that the middle path is established by eliminating the two extremes. If they do not accept that things are not inherently established, then, since there is no third alternative, they must accept that things are inherently established. This is clearly stated in the Vigrahavyāvartanī: If you refute the absence of intrinsic existence With the absence of intrinsic existence, Then, by refuting the absence of intrinsic existence, You establish the presence of intrinsic existence. I have already explained at length elsewhere why accepting such a thesis and a means of proof does not make one a proponent of private dogmaticism, so I will not elaborate on it here. What are the characteristics of the two types of negation? In general, a negation is something that is understood by the mind through the explicit elimination of the object of negation. Thus, for example, a non-entity is not a negation that is merely the elimination of the object of negation. Phenomena such as ultimate reality and ultimate truth are negations even though they are not explicitly expressed by words that eliminate the object of negation. When they appear in the mind, they appear in a form that eliminates conceptual elaborations.
Non-affirming negation is a mental process that eliminates its object of negation and does not imply or affirm any other phenomenon. For example, when asked whether a brahmin should drink alcohol, the answer "I do not drink alcohol" is merely the elimination of drinking alcohol. It does not imply or affirm anything other than that, such as "I drink something other than alcohol" or "I do not drink anything at all." Affirming negation is a mental process that eliminates its object of negation and implies or affirms another phenomenon. For example, when someone wants to show that a person is of low caste, he says "He is not a brahmin." This is not merely the elimination of brahminhood. It implies or affirms that he is of low caste, which is inferior to brahminhood in terms of learning and so forth. There are three ways in which another phenomenon can be implied: explicitly, implicitly, and by context.
The first is like saying "the self does not exist," in which both the negation of the object of negation and the indication of another phenomenon are established by the same word. The second is like saying "the fat Yajñadatta does not eat during the day," which is indicated by the meaning. These two are each indicated by the explicit or the implicit, while both are indicated in "the fat Yajñadatta does not eat during the day, but he is not emaciated."
Third, when a person is certain to be either a kṣatriya or a brahmin, but his particular status is uncertain, one cannot say, for example, 'He is not a brahmin' by means of one's own words. As stated in the commentary on the Prajñāpradīpa: A negation that is implied by the context, A single word that is affirmative, And one that does not indicate its own words Are not nonimplicative negations, but other negations. Some say that when a basis and a collection are present, there is no nonimplicative negation. This is untenable, for since a brahmin, for example, is the basis for determining whether another phenomenon is implied or not, it is not the other phenomenon that is implied. Thus, the four noble theses are presented here: How could that effect arise from a nature that is not its own? How could it arise from other intrinsically identifiable causes? How could it arise from both itself and others? How could it arise without a cause? If things exist inherently, they must arise in one of four ways. Arising inherently is limited to two possibilities: with or without a cause. If there is a cause, it is limited to three possibilities: arising from itself, from something else, or from both. Thus, four theses suffice.
The second has four parts: refutation of self-arising, refutation of other-arising, refutation of arising from both self and other, and refutation of causeless arising. The first has two parts: refutation by the logic of the commentators and refutation by the logic of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā. The first has three parts: refutation of the systems of philosophers who claim to understand reality, showing that they do not exist even conventionally for those whose minds are not affected by philosophical systems, and summarizing the refutations. The first has two parts: refutation of arising from a cause that is of the same essence as itself and refutation of the cause and effect being of the same essence. The first has three parts: the absurdity that arising from a cause that is of the same essence as itself would be pointless, the contradiction with logic that arising from a cause that is of the same essence as itself would entail, and refutation of the responses that attempt to avoid these faults.
If one asks on what grounds it is certain that things do not arise from themselves, the answer is that if the sprout, which is the agent of the action of arising, arises from its own nature, there is no additional quality that would need to arise. This is because the sprout's own nature already exists at the time of the cause. The Sāṃkhyas say that the different causes and conditions have a single common effect. They also say that without a single primary nature common to the causes and conditions, this would not be possible. They therefore maintain that the nature of the sprout is the same as the nature of its causes and conditions. They maintain that the nature of all manifestations is the same in this way. This is different from the Buddhist view that a thing and a pot are of the same nature. If the entire nature or essence of the sprout is present at the time of the seed, then there cannot be any manifestation of the sprout that is different from its essence. Therefore, at the time of the cause, not only the nature or essence of the sprout but also the sprout itself must be present. In that case, there is absolutely no point in it arising again after it has already come into existence.
Second, it is not reasonable for something that has already arisen to arise again, that is, to arise after having already arisen. The word "also" indicates that it is not only pointless for something to arise from its own nature. If one accepts the position of manifestation, then if the manifested effect is present at the time of the cause, this contradicts one's own position. If it is not present, then one should refute the identity and difference between the manifestation of the effect and its nature.
Since the statement "self-arising contradicts reason" is merely an assertion, the following reasoning is given to refute it: If one thinks that a seed that has already sprouted can grow again, then what prevents the seed from growing again, after the sprout has been prevented from growing? There is nothing that prevents it. Therefore, the arising of the sprout and so on, including the stem and the husk, will never be found in this world. Another problem is that the seed will grow continuously until the end of existence, because it must grow again after having grown already. These two faults show that the arising of similar effects is prevented and that similar causes arise continuously.
If one thinks that the conditions that benefit the arising of the sprout, such as water and the spring season, transform the seed into something like a fermented mash and cause the sprout to arise, and that the sprout, because it is incompatible with the seed that gave rise to it, causes the seed to cease and arise, then one has no opportunity to commit the two errors of contradicting reason, as stated in the faults. And since the seed and the sprout are not different in nature or essence, they are not unarisen from themselves. This is also incorrect. Since the two natures of the seed and the sprout are in all respects identical, how could the sprout destroy the seed? It could not, just as a sprout does not destroy another sprout. Even when confronted with such a refutation, the opponent does not back down. This is because the opponent is foolish and thinks that the sprout destroys the seed in terms of its manifestation, so how could it be the same as destroying itself? If all the essences or natures were mutually identical, then the individual manifestations would not be established, and the refutation could not be avoided.
The second has three parts: refutation through the consequence that the seed and sprout would be without difference in shape and so forth; refutation of the response that attempts to avoid this fault; and refutation through the consequence that both would be apprehended or not apprehended in each of the two phases.
There is another problem. The shape of the sprout, such as its length, its color, such as green, its taste, such as sweet, its potency, and its ripening are all different from the color, shape, and so on of the seed that produced it. But for you, these would not be different, because there would be no difference at all between the nature and essence of the seed and the sprout. This is the reverse pervasion. And since these are not observed to be identical, their essences are not completely identical. This is the reverse pervasion. The reverse pervasion is very different from the reverse pervasion that is a natural pervasion. Potency is like the medicine for hemorrhoids that cures the disease merely by being held near the body, or like the herbs that make one fly when held. Ripening is like the change in the nature of a substance due to different conditions, such as the change in the taste of a myrobalan fruit or a black peppercorn from sour to sweet when soaked in milk.
If you say, 'The seed gives up its state and becomes something else, a sprout. Therefore, since seed and sprout are merely different states, the seed itself becomes a sprout,' then if the seed gives up its previous state and becomes something else, a sprout, then how could you say that the nature of the seed is the nature of the sprout? It could not be so, because the state of the seed is the state of the seed, and there is no state of the seed that is different from its nature. Therefore, the inseparability of the nature of the seed and the nature of the sprout is lost. If you say, 'Although the shape and so on of the seed and the sprout are different, there is no contradiction because the substance is not different,' that is not right, because if the shape and so on are not apprehended, the substance of the seed and the sprout is not apprehended either.
There is another problem. If, as you say, there is no difference between the essential nature of the seed and the essential nature of the sprout in this world, then just as the seed is not apprehended in the state of the sprout, the sprout also would not be apprehended. Or, since the essential nature of the seed and the sprout is completely identical, just as the sprout is apprehended in the state of the sprout, the seed also would be apprehended by sensory perception. But this is not the case. Therefore, in order to avoid these two faults, one should not accept that there is no difference between the essential nature of the seed and the essential nature of the sprout. If these arguments are well understood, all the misconceptions that the essential nature of all phenomena is mutually different, but that their ultimate nature is identical, and that the ultimate nature at the time of the previous state is the same as the ultimate nature at the time of the subsequent state will be avoided.
Thus, having refuted the arising from self as conceived in the Sāṅkhya system, which is a system that claims to understand reality but is different from the Buddhist system, and which posits a self, Candrakīrti now shows that even in the perspective of ordinary people, who have not trained their minds in any philosophical system, the idea of arising from self is untenable. He says: "Because even when the seed, the cause, is destroyed, its effect is still seen, the world does not accept that the seed and the sprout are identical."
Since arising from self is inconsistent with reason in both the ultimate and the conventional perspectives, this idea that external and internal things arise from self is not reasonable in either the ultimate sense or in the conventional sense of the world. Therefore, when the noble ones refute arising from self, they do so in general terms, without qualifying it as ultimate or conventional. They say, 'It does not arise from self.' Thus, the master Bhāvaviveka's qualification 'ultimately' in the statement 'Things do not arise from self ultimately, because they exist, like a sentient being' is meaningless.
There is another fault. If one accepts that the effect arises from itself, then the object of production, the effect, and the producer, the cause, as well as the action that is to be done and the agent that does it would all be one and the same. But they are not one and the same. Therefore, arising from itself should not be accepted, because the faults explained in this treatise and in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā would ensue. The first fault is explained in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā: Cause and effect cannot ever be one and the same. If cause and effect were one and the same, producer and produced would be one and the same. This means that if cause and effect were of the same nature, then father and son or eye and eye consciousness would be one and the same. The second fault is explained in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā: If the fuel were the fire, then agent and action would be one and the same. When it is refuted in this way, if one says that father and son or agent and action are of the same nature, then one cannot avoid the logical conclusion that they are one and the same. Therefore, one should not accept arising from itself, because one would then be afraid of the faults explained above. And since the existence and nonexistence of arising from itself are mutually exclusive, if there is no arising from itself, one must definitely accept it.
This has two parts: stating the opponent's position and refuting that position.
The first of these is the view of the Buddhist essentialists. They say that since it is meaningless for something to arise from itself, arising from self is not reasonable. Since that does not exist, arising from both is also not reasonable. Since arising without a cause is completely unacceptable, it is not reasonable to refute arising from other. However, they say, we cannot help but accept arising from other, since the scriptures teach that the four conditions are the causes of things. The four conditions are as follows. Some schools of Buddhist thought say that the causal condition is the five causes, excluding the active cause. The objective condition is all phenomena that are objects of the six consciousnesses. The immediately preceding condition is all minds and mental factors that have arisen previously, except for those that precede the entry into the state of cessation. The dominant condition is the active cause. Some schools of Buddhist thought say that the causal condition is that which is the seed of the arising of something. The objective condition is that which is observed in front of the sense faculties. The dominant condition is the active cause. The immediately preceding condition is that which immediately precedes the entry into the state of cessation. The other conditions are the three conditions that are the causes of the two types of meditative absorption. The other things arise from the two conditions. They are not caused by Īśvara and so on, because they arise in sequence and so on.
This has two parts: the general refutation of the position that accepts arising from other and the specific refutation of the Cittamātra system. The first has five parts: the actual refutation of arising from other, dispelling the worldly refutation of the refutation, showing the benefits of the refutation, showing that there is no arising by virtue of an essence anywhere, and showing the benefits of refuting arising by virtue of an essence in both truths. The first has three parts: the general refutation of arising from other, the specific refutation of arising from other, and the refutation of arising from other through analyzing the four possibilities with respect to effects. The first has two parts: the actual absurd consequence and an analysis of the extremes.
The first is that this arising from another cannot be posited because it contradicts reasoning and scripture. The second is that it contradicts many scriptures such as the one in the Śālistambaka Sūtra that says, "The sprout of name and form is not produced by itself, nor is it produced by another." In terms of reasoning, it is said: If an effect that is established by its own nature arises in dependence on a cause that is established by its own nature, then a thick darkness could arise from a blazing fire, and any effect could arise from any cause. Why? Because all that do not produce an effect are equal to those that do in being different from the effect by way of their own characteristics. This is the first absurd consequence, which is based on an argument accepted by the opponent. If the two types of difference are equal, then just as a rice seed that is different from a rice sprout produces a rice sprout, a firebrand and so on would also produce a rice sprout. And just as a rice sprout that is different from a rice seed arises from a rice seed, a pot and a cloth would also arise from a rice seed. This is the second absurd consequence, which is based on an argument accepted by the opponent. This is the reasoning given in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā: "Cause and effect are never tenable as different. If cause and effect were different, then cause and noncause would be equal." In both of these absurd consequences, the reverse of the original argument is implied, as explained in the commentary.
The second has two parts: the reason for applying the absurd consequence to arising from other and the non-contradiction of accepting the reverse of the absurd consequence.
Regarding the reason why the absurd consequence of excessive production applies to those who accept other-production, some Tibetans say that it is because cause and effect are necessarily sequential and that other things must be simultaneous. This is completely wrong, because all the faults that they have leveled against us apply equally to them. And if they deny that they have accepted this, then their effort to find a reason for it is pointless. Also, many Tibetans say that when logicians establish that wherever there is a special kind of smoke there is fire, and that wherever there is a product it is impermanent, they are establishing that these are invariable concomitances in all places and times. When they establish this, they do so in relation to a single, limited case, such as a kitchen or a pot. Then, on the basis of the similarity of the concomitances in those cases and in other places and times, they establish that those two concomitances are invariable in all places and times. In that case, they are subject to the absurd consequence of excessive production on the basis of a reason that is merely similar to the other. This is called the reductio ad absurdum of a single counterpervasion.
This is a statement that does not understand the meaning of the text and does not understand the way that logic works. It is not possible that the two reasons, special smoke and product, are not qualified by place and time and are nonerroneous with respect to fire and impermanence in general, and that when fire and impermanence are negated, the two reasons are not negated. However, there are many cases where the two are not cause and effect, but are merely other, so how could they be similar? Therefore, the Prasannapadā says that there is a difference between accepting and not accepting arising: "We accept mere conditionality, but not the four alternatives. If we accepted the four alternatives, we would have to accept that things have intrinsic nature. But that is not reasonable. If things are different by virtue of their own characteristic, they cannot be related by dependence. If a single cause produces its own effect, it would produce all things that are not its effect. If a single effect is produced by its own cause, it would be produced by all things that are not its cause. Therefore, as explained above, this is the fault of not understanding well the two: the measure of grasping the object of negation when refuting something like this, and the presentation of dependent arising that accepts only this much. So one should remember the explanation of the measure of the object of negation when refuting the object of negation.
If one accepts the opposite of the two consequences explained above, then how should one understand the following statements from the Prasannapadā? "The opposite of the consequence is connected only to the opponent, not to us, because we have no thesis." And, "How could the opposite of the consequence, which has the sense of the opposite of the consequence, be entailed by the proponent of intrinsic existence? Because we have no thesis." And, "Since the consequence is only intended to refute the opponent's thesis, the opposite of the consequence is not accepted." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And, "Since the opposite of the consequence is not proven, the purpose of the consequence is not pointless." And
The second has two parts: the response that attempts to refute the objection and the refutation of that response.
Here one might object, "Although cause and effect are different from each other in an intrinsic sense, everything does not arise from everything. Rather, cause and effect are seen to be distinct. This is because whatever thing is able to produce another thing is said to be its effect. Therefore, the effect is definite. Therefore, the cause is definite. A cause that is able to produce an effect is a cause even if it is intrinsically different from the effect. Therefore, the cause is definite. Thus, cause and effect are posited in terms of a specific difference, not in terms of a general difference. Moreover, a rice sprout arises from a rice seed that belongs to the same continuum, not from a barley seed that belongs to a different continuum. Even within the same continuum, a later moment does not arise from a previous moment. Therefore, a rice sprout arises from a previous moment within the same continuum that produces it. Thus, a rice sprout does not arise in the same way that a barley sprout arises from a barley seed and so on. Therefore, everything does not arise from everything."
This is to be asked of those who maintain that cause and effect are inherently established. If they say, 'Because we see a definite connection,' then why do they see such a definite connection? When they are asked this, they will say, 'Because we see a definite connection, we see a definite connection.' This is merely saying the same thing over again. It does not in the least remove the fault. This is saying that since they do not give a reason why a definite connection is not contradictory even if they are inherently different, their answer is not a response that removes the fault. Moreover, it is explained that this very fact, which is well known and not distinguished in any way, that inherent difference is common to all causes and effects, whether they are related or not, is a refutation of the opponent's position. Just as the stamens of rice and lotus flowers, and the flowers of the keṅśuka tree, are different from rice seeds and therefore are not asserted to be producers of rice sprouts, do not have the capacity to produce rice sprouts, are not in the same continuum, and are not of a similar type that preceded them, in the same way, rice seeds are not endowed with the four features that are related to the rice sprout, because they are inherently different. This is an argument that shows that it is impossible to posit whether or not there are four features in unrelated things.
This has two parts: refutation of the arising of one thing from another in terms of cause and effect being sequential and refutation of the arising of one thing from another in terms of cause and effect being simultaneous. The first has two parts: the actual point and rebutting the objection.
Having thus refuted the opponent by speaking of other-establishment as if it were established by intrinsic nature, he now explains that it is impossible for cause and effect to be established by intrinsic nature as other. In this world, Maitreya and Upagupta, who are both present, are seen as other in relation to each other, in the sense that one is not the other. But the sprout does not exist at the same time as the seed. For without the transformation of the seed, there is no sprout. The seed is not established by intrinsic nature as other than the sprout, and without this, how could the seed be other than the sprout? It could not be. Since the sprout is not established by intrinsic nature as arising from the seed, you should abandon the position that things arise from other things. If the seed were intrinsically different from the sprout, it would never change, and so at the time of the seed it would be a different substance from the sprout. In that case, the two would be simultaneous, but they are not. This shows that the two are not established by intrinsic nature as other. This does not refute the conventional claim that cause and effect are intrinsically different substances. The refutation must be understood in terms of the object of refutation.
Second, it might be said that the sprout and the seed do not exist simultaneously. This is not reasonable. Just as the two ends of a scale move up and down simultaneously, and not at different times, so too the two actions of arising and ceasing of the sprout and the seed are simultaneous. Therefore, since they are different, there is no fault. If one thinks that the two actions of the sprout and the seed are simultaneous, as illustrated by the example of the scale, this is not reasonable. For the sprout and the seed do not exist at the same time. If one thinks that the two actions of the sprout and the seed are simultaneous, as illustrated by the example of the scale, this is not reasonable. For the sprout and the seed do not exist at the same time. How could the sprout and the seed be simultaneous? The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The example of the scale is not valid. The
If the sūtra does not teach the simultaneity of seed and sprout by way of the up and down movement of a scale beam, then what kind of simultaneity is intended by the example of the scale beam? The commentary explains that the simultaneity of the two events is meant to illustrate the simultaneous arising of the two events in dependence upon each other, which is like an illusion. Since the sūtra teaches the simultaneity of the two events by way of the example of the scale beam, it cannot be taken to mean that the seed and sprout are simultaneous. Therefore, the refutation of the simultaneity of the two events is in terms of intrinsically real events. It is not a refutation of the simultaneity of events in general. In any case, the arising of the sprout must be simultaneous with the cessation of the seed. This is not problematic for those who accept conventional arising, but it is problematic for those who accept ultimate or intrinsic arising. For those who accept ultimate arising, the two events must be simultaneous, because if they are intrinsically real, they cannot change into something else. Thus, the arising of the sprout must be simultaneous with the cessation of the seed. The arising of the sprout is the event that is the object of the action of arising. It is the object of the action of arising in dependence upon the seed. The seed is the agent of the action of arising. The arising of the sprout is simultaneous with the cessation of the seed. This is not problematic for those who accept conventional arising, but it is problematic for those who accept ultimate arising. This is because if the two events are intrinsically real, they cannot change into something else. This is the way to understand the refutation. If one understands how to refute the opponent with valid reasoning and how to avoid the opponent's refutation being valid against oneself, one will be able to present the flawless Madhyamaka view. If one can do this, one is a Mādhyamika. Otherwise, one is like the fool described in the Prasannapadā: "We do not debate with fools."
Here one might say, "Since there is no simultaneity of seed and sprout, there is no intrinsic otherness, so arising from another is not reasonable. But since there is simultaneity of cause and effect, there is otherness, so there is arising from another. For example, the visual consciousness and the feelings and so on that are simultaneous with it." Some say that just as the eye and form and so on and the feelings and so on that arise together are simultaneous conditions for the arising of the visual consciousness, so the eye and so on and the feelings and so on are simultaneous conditions for each other. If one thinks that the visual consciousness has as its causes the eye and so on that are simultaneous with it and that the feelings and so on that arise together with them are conditions for it, then even though there is otherness in relation to the feelings and so on, since the effect already exists at the time of the cause, what need is there for it to arise again? There is no need at all, so there is no arising. If one wants to avoid the fault of there being no arising, one might say that the effect does not exist at the time of the cause. In that case, the fault of there being no intrinsic otherness between the simultaneous cause and effect has already been explained. Thus, this reasoning shows that there can be no intrinsic arising from another, even though there is arising from another. Therefore, the statement that there is arising from another is empty of any referent object. It is just a sound that remains.
If a cause is that which produces something other than itself, then does that cause produce an effect that is inherently existent, or does it produce an effect that is inherently nonexistent, or does it produce an effect that is both existent and nonexistent, or does it produce an effect that is neither existent nor nonexistent? First, if the effect is inherently existent, what need is there for a condition to produce it? There is no need. If something inherently existent were to arise, it would arise again after already having arisen. This has already been shown to be illogical. What use is a condition for a nonexistent effect? It is nonexistent, like the horn of a donkey. What use is a condition for a combination of both existence and nonexistence? Such a combination is impossible. What use is a condition for something that is neither existent nor nonexistent? Such a thing is impossible.
The second has two parts: (1) dispelling the refutation by the world by accepting arising from other in worldly convention and (2) dispelling the refutation by the world by showing that arising from other does not exist even in worldly convention. The first has two parts: (1) the refutation by the world and (2) the reply showing that it does not refute.
The reasoning you have given to prove the arising of one thing from another is like dry kindling doused in oil. It has been consumed by the fire of your intelligence. You have already stoked the fire of your wisdom with the kindling of reasoning. Now it is enough. You do not need to stoke it any further. You might object that without presenting reasoning, the desired goal of proving the arising of one thing from another cannot be achieved. This is not the case. As it is said, "There is no need for any further reasoning in regard to what is established in the world. For the perception of the world is extremely powerful." This is to say that all worldly people adhere to their own views. They accept the perception of the world as valid. They directly perceive that one thing arises from another. When they are presented with logical arguments, they are only interested in arguments that concern things that are directly perceptible.
Since direct perception establishes the existence of other-arising, there is no need to posit any further logic to prove it. Therefore, what use is there in presenting further logic to prove that things arise from other sources, when other-arising is established without any further logic? There is no use, because it is established by direct perception.
Those who have not correctly understood the meaning of the scriptures and who have been habituated to the misconception of the true existence of phenomena since beginningless time, due to the ripening of the habitual tendencies for grasping at true existence, are separated from the familiar friend of the misconception of true existence. They are separated from the method of separating from it, the repeated hearing of the way things lack inherent existence. They rely on the nonsense of worldly refutations. Without explaining many worldly ways, it is impossible to turn them away from the nonsense of worldly refutations. Therefore, one must teach them the special objects of refutation, saying, "The world refutes such and such objects," and the special objects that are not refuted, saying, "The world does not refute such and such objects." This requires a preliminary presentation of the distinction between the two truths. This has five parts: a general presentation of the two truths, applying this to the present context, an explanation of the nature of each of the two truths, showing the refutation of the worldly refutation of the refutation, and showing the way in which the worldly refutation refutes.
This has four parts: (1) stating that all phenomena have two natures due to the division into the two truths, (2) presenting other classifications of the two truths, (3) explaining the divisions of the conventional truth in relation to the world, and (4) showing that the object of clinging of mistaken clinging does not exist even conventionally.

Although there are many ways of positing the basis of the division into the two truths, here it is taken to be objects of knowledge. As the Meeting of Father and Son Sūtra, cited in the Compendium of Conduct, says: Thus the Tathāgata understands both conventional truth and ultimate truth. Objects of knowledge are exhausted in these two truths. The Blessed One sees emptiness, understands it, and realizes it well. Therefore he is called omniscient. The phrase "objects of knowledge" indicates the basis of the division. "Are exhausted in these two truths" indicates that the truths are limited to two. And the statement that the Tathāgata understands both truths shows that he is omniscient. Therefore those who explain that the ultimate truth is not an object of knowledge and is not understood by any mind are giving a distorted explanation. The division of the truths is the nature of the division. As for the meaning of the division, although both truths have an essence, there is no essence that is both and there is no essence that is neither. If the phenomena were different in essence from their emptiness of truth status, they would be truly established. Therefore, the essence of the two truths is one, but they are distinguished by their conceptual opposites, like being made and being impermanent. The first four lines of the above quotation mean that the ultimate truth is not different in essence from the conventional truth. For the conventional truth is empty of truth status, and the ultimate truth is posited on the basis of the conventional truth.


Now, in order to illustrate the meaning of the above-explained general delusion of the mind with regard to its object of adherence by means of a specific example, the following is stated. The tīrthikas, whose minds are disturbed by the sleep of ignorance, have erroneous philosophical views and fallacious reasoning. They are harmed by these. In order to enter into reality, they do not apprehend the unmistaken arising and ceasing that is known to all, from the most learned to the most ignorant, such as cowherds and women. Instead, they wish to go beyond the world. For example, just as someone climbing a tree falls into the abyss when letting go of the previous branch before grasping the next one, they fall into the abyss of bad views. They will not attain the fruit of liberation, which is the correct seeing of the two truths. Therefore, the qualities of the three natures and so on that these tīrthikas imagine to exist in their own systems do not exist even on the level of worldly convention. Similarly, the horses and elephants that are perceived in an illusion, the water that is perceived in a mirage, and the face that is perceived in a reflection do not exist even on the level of worldly convention. However, just as there is a reflection that does not exist as a face, there are blue and so on that do not exist by way of their own intrinsic character. And just as there are external objects, there are also reflections that are accepted as forms of visual consciousness. Later on, it will also be said that reflections generate visual consciousness. This should be understood in the same way for illusions, echoes, and so on. This is the unique presentation of this holy system.
Since the meaning of suchness cannot be established by conventional cognition, the refutation of arising from other is not done while abiding in the worldly view alone. Rather, it is done while accepting the noble ones' vision of suchness, and it is done ultimately. When this refutation of arising from other is qualified as ultimate, then just as the perception of floating hairs and so on by a diseased eye does not invalidate the perception of those without diseased eyes, in the same way, the worldly mind, which is devoid of the stainless wisdom and is thus polluted by ignorance, does not invalidate the stainless mind that is not polluted by ignorance. Therefore, even if arising from other is established from the worldly perspective, it does not invalidate the refutation of arising from other ultimately. Thus the opponent is worthy of ridicule by the wise and holy ones.
The third has two parts: the explanation of conventional truth and the explanation of ultimate truth. The first has three parts: what is true from the perspective of what is conventional and not true from the perspective of what is ultimate, how the mere conventional appears and does not appear to three types of persons, and how the ultimate and the conventional are relative to ordinary beings and noble ones. The first has two parts: the actual point and the explanation of the unique presentation of the afflictions.
Since this causes sentient beings to be obscured with regard to the view of the nature of things as they are, it is delusion. Ignorance is the superimposition of inherent existence on things that do not inherently exist. The obscurer of the vision of the nature of things is the nature of the conventional truth. This identifies the conventional truth as the obscurer in the phrase "conventional truth." It does not identify the conventional truth in general.
This identification is also the meaning of the statement in the Descent into Laṅkā Sūtra: "All entities are produced conventionally, but ultimately they are without inherent existence. The delusion that there is inherent existence where there is no inherent existence is accepted as conventional truth." This means that the conventional truth is the mind that is deluded into thinking that there is inherent existence where there is no inherent existence ultimately. Since the equivalent term for conventional truth is also used for "obscurer," it is an obscurer.
If you ask what obscures, it is the obscurer of the correct relative truth. This means that it is the obscurer of the correct meaning, or the obscurer of the truth. This is not to say that it is the correct relative truth among the two truths of correct and incorrect relative truth. The relative truth taught in the first line and the relative truth taught in the last two lines should not be taken as the same. The first is the relative truth in which things are accepted as arising and so forth. The second is the relative truth that grasps things as true.
Through the power of this conventional truth-habit, blue and so forth appear to sentient beings as if they were inherently established, even though they are not. This appearance of a fabrication is true for them, and so the Sage said that it is the conventional truth for the world. This is the conventional truth of the world, which is the opposite of the truth for the world as explained above.
The third person, who is a fabricator, fabricates things that are false by nature. Therefore, they are called mere conventionalities. Some dependently arisen phenomena, such as reflections and echoes, are false but appear to those who are ignorant. Some phenomena, such as blue and so forth, feelings and mind, appear to be true. The nature of phenomena, however, does not appear in any way to those who are ignorant. Therefore, that which is false even conventionally and that which is the nature are not conventional truths.
If the meaning of this is explained, it is better to translate it as in Naktso's translation, "in some respects." Although a reflection and so on are false, they appear. They appear to be false. They are false in the sense of being a combination of appearing to be a face and being empty of being a face. Therefore, their lack of true existence is their lack of true existence as a face. It does not mean that they lack true existence in the sense of being established by way of their own character. Therefore, although a reflection is established as empty of being a face, there is no contradiction in its being a conventional truth in the perspective of the conventional consciousness that apprehends it as established by way of its own character.
Therefore, when it is said that a reflection is not conventional truth, it is with the intention that a reflection, such as that of a face, is not a conventional truth in relation to the world that is familiar with symbols, since it is a false face. How could it be that it is not posited as a conventional truth in the sense explained by the statement, "What is seen is conventional truth, but what is not seen is ultimate truth"? If it were otherwise, and if something that is not conventionally true cannot be a conventional truth, then it would contradict the statement that there is nothing established by way of its own character even conventionally, and it would contradict all the presentations of refuting true existence, establishing nontrue existence, and so on, which are done conventionally. Therefore, those who say that reflections and such are not conventional truths but merely conventional, since they are objects known to be mistaken even by the ordinary consciousnesses of worldly beings, do not understand the definitive enumeration of the two truths, the truth and falsity in relation to worldly beings, and the truth and falsity posited by Mādhyamikas.
It is said that the nature of the ultimate truth does not appear to anyone who is endowed with ignorance. This statement is made with the intention that the noble ones who have not abandoned ignorance have not realized the ultimate truth directly. The wisdom of noble beings in postmeditation and the views of the ultimate truth of ordinary beings are distorted by ignorance and its habitual tendencies. Therefore, they do not appear directly, but it must be accepted that they appear in general. In this way, it is said that the conventional truth is established by the power of the ignorance that is part of the links of existence and is afflicted. The ignorance that grasps phenomena as truly existent, which is known as the grasping at the self of persons and the self of phenomena, is accepted as the ignorance that is the first of the twelve links. Therefore, it is not accepted as the cognitive obscuration.
"Due to the influence of the truth-habit of ignorance, conventional truth is posited" means that it is the way in which conventional truth is posited from the perspective of someone who posits it that is being shown, not that pots, woolen cloth, and so on, which are conventional truths, are posited by that truth-habit. For it is held that what is posited by that truth-habit is impossible even conventionally. Therefore, since the conventional in the phrase "conventional truth" and the conventional in the statement that pots and so on exist conventionally are similar in name, it appears that many have mistaken them for the same thing, so they should be carefully distinguished.
Are all these pots and so forth true in the relative truth of all beings who have not attained buddhahood, or are there some beings for whom they are not true in the relative truth? The form, sound, and so forth that are posited as relative truth are, for the hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas who have abandoned the afflictive ignorance and who see conditioned phenomena as like reflections and so forth, artificial in nature and not true, because they do not conceive of them as true. The meaning of this statement is as follows. The beings for whom these are not true are three: hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas.
Since this is not done for śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas, the special mention is that they have realized directly that all conditioned phenomena are empty of inherent existence, like reflections, yet appear as such. This is the first special quality. Since this is also present in bodhisattvas on the seven impure grounds and in the noble śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas in training, the text adds that the third person has abandoned ignorance. This refers to bodhisattvas on the pure grounds and to the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha arhats, for whom these phenomena are not true.
Whatever is untrue is also untrue, meaning that external and internal phenomena are untrue. The reason for their untruth is that they are not considered to be true, because the ignorance of grasping at truth has been exhausted. Therefore, external and internal phenomena are not established as true from the perspective of the conventional truth of those three persons.
In this way, the commentary does not at all establish that those are not conventional truths, but rather establishes that they are not truths. To take this as establishing that they are not conventional truths is a very coarse mental engagement. This is a bad system of explanation that contaminates the master's thought with the dirt of one's own mind.
Such a refutation is not directed at those three individuals, but rather at others like us who do not consider those three to be truthful. Those below those three individuals still have innate grasping at truth, so it is impossible to refute the truth of anything from the perspective of all of them.
If, instead of what was explained above, one were to prove that they are not conventional truths from their perspective, one would be offering a completely irrelevant proof. For, in order to establish that a given basis is a conventional truth from the perspective of that awareness, one must establish that that basis is false. So to offer the lack of clinging to truth in that context as a reason is ridiculous.
The reason why, in order to establish a given basis as a conventional truth from the perspective of that awareness, one must establish that basis as false is as follows. When one posits the truth in the phrase "conventional truth" in relation to a pot and so on, one does so in relation to either the awareness or the object. One does not posit truth in relation to the object. Rather, one must posit truth in relation to the conventional apprehension of truth. When one sees this, one realizes that if one does not apply this qualification, one cannot establish truth, and one must see that the object is false.
Second, since it appears important to understand the unique identification of the afflictions in this system, which is not in accord with the identification of the afflictions in the higher and lower Abhidharma, I will explain it. There are two types of grasping at the truth-status of phenomena: grasping at the truth-status of persons and grasping at the truth-status of phenomena. This is also the assertion of the two types of self-grasping, as explained above.
In both the Madhyamakavatara and the Catuh-s-t states that this grasping at truth status is the afflictive ignorance. It is also explained that the Hearer and Solitary Realizer Foe Destroyers have abandoned that ignorance, and in the Catuh-s-t commentary it is explained that the bodhisattva who has attained the acceptance that phenomena are non-arising has abandoned it. Therefore, afflictive ignorance is the opposite of the knowledge of the suchness of selflessness. It is not taken to be merely the absence of that knowledge or merely something other than that knowledge. Rather, it is the opposite that is the discordant class, the superimposition that persons and phenomena are inherently established.
Thus, the way of positing the reification of a self of phenomena as afflicted ignorance and the apprehension of 'I' and 'mine' as established by way of their own character as the view of the transitory collection is not in agreement with the Vaibhāṣikas.
According to the Vaibhāṣika system, as explained in the ninth chapter of the Abhidharmakosha-bhāṣya, the view of the transitory collection that grasps the person as a self-sufficient substance is the view of the transitory collection that grasps the 'I,' and the view of the transitory collection that grasps 'mine' is the view that grasps the person's possessions as objects controlled by that self-sufficient person. This is a very different way of positing the two views of the transitory collection.
Although the apprehension of a person as a self-sufficient, substantially existent entity also occurs in those whose minds are not affected by philosophical tenets, the apprehension of a person as existing separately from the aggregates, with a different nature, does not occur in those whose minds are not affected by philosophical tenets. Thus there are two types of views grasping at extremes.
If one accepts that persons and phenomena are established by way of their own character, how does one establish that such a grasping is afflicted ignorance and the two types of self-grasping? The intrinsically established person and phenomena are refuted by the reasonings that refute them. At that time, such a grasping is established as a misapprehension of its conceived object, a grasping at true existence. If that is established, then grasping at the two—persons and phenomena—as truly established is established as the two types of self-grasping. If those are established, then since that grasping at true existence is established as the incompatible opposite of the cognition of the meaning of suchness, it is established as ignorance. And since one can establish that as long as that is not exhausted, the view of the transitory collection is not exhausted, it is established as afflicted ignorance. Thus, it is very important to be able to posit the unique presentation of the afflictions.
The way in which other afflictions such as desire also operate from the delusion of grasping at true existence is described in the Catuhsataka: Just as the body sense faculty is present in the body, So delusion is present in all afflictions. The commentary on this verse states: Delusion is so called because it is the ignorance that causes one to grasp at the truth of things. It operates by superimposing a true existence on things.
As stated, "Attachment and so forth operate in dependence upon delusion, and are not separate from it, because they operate by superimposing distinctions of beauty and ugliness and so forth on the nature of things that are imagined by delusion. They operate in dependence upon delusion, because delusion is the main factor."
The statement that desire and so forth operate indistinguishably from delusion means that they operate in conjunction with delusion and do not operate independently of it. The reason for this is that desire and so forth operate in dependence upon ignorance. Here, the superimposition of attractiveness and unattractiveness upon objects is the improper mental engagement that is the cause of the arising of desire and hatred. Therefore, this does not indicate the mode of apprehension of desire and hatred. Therefore, the statement that "desire and hatred operate only in dependence upon what is imagined by delusion" means that desire and hatred operate in dependence upon the superimposition of attractiveness and unattractiveness upon things that exist inherently.
It is not that only the truly established self imputed by ignorance is taught to be the object of both the object and the aspect of attachment and so forth, for the object of both the object and the aspect of the two innate forms of self-grasping is established as a basis, and attachment and so forth are concomitant with ignorance, so their objects are similar.
The two improper mental engagements give rise to the desire for objects and the aversion to objects, which are the forms of attachment and aversion. Therefore, attachment and aversion are not posited as the desire for and aversion to objects that are merely induced by the apprehension of a person as a self-sufficient substantial entity. Thus, the ways of positing attachment and aversion are also different.
They will also rely on delusion. This means that, due to the delusion of grasping at intrinsic existence, they will give rise to attachment and so forth.
The example of the body and the body sense faculty is that just as the other four sense faculties have no support other than the body sense faculty, so all other afflictions operate in dependence on delusion and do not operate without it. Therefore, since the destruction of delusion destroys all afflictions, it is said that one should pay attention to the teaching on dependent origination, which is the antidote to delusion, and which is the teaching on the emptiness of inherent existence.
This grasping at the true existence of things is also said in the Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness to be the fundamental ignorance that is the root of saṃsāra. The Sixty Reasonings also says: If one finds any basis for abiding, One will be seized by the cunning, poisonous snake of the afflictions. Those whose minds have no basis Will not be seized. Thus it says that if one finds any basis for the focus of grasping at true existence, one will be seized by the snake of the afflictions. And immediately after that it says: How could the great poison of the afflictions Not arise in those whose minds have a basis? Thus this is the holy intention of the noble ones.
The second half of the verse is introduced with the words: "This is said to show that those who seek to abandon the afflictions while perceiving the intrinsic nature of form and so on cannot possibly abandon the afflictions." The commentary also says: "If one perceives entities, the infinite afflictions such as desire will definitely arise and cannot be averted. How so? If the entity is agreeable, then attachment to it will be hard to reverse. If it is disagreeable, then anger and resentment toward it will be hard to reverse." The commentary also says that even if the object is neither agreeable nor disagreeable, ignorance will arise. When the perception of an object as established by its intrinsic nature is present in the mind, either desire or anger will arise. If neither of these two arises, then a type of ignorance will arise.
The Bodhicaryāvatāra also says: A mind that has an object of observation Will remain in some place. A mind that is without emptiness Will arise again after it has ceased, Like the meditative absorption of nondiscrimination. In this regard, there is no difference between these two masters and Buddhapālita in their interpretation of the thought of the noble Nāgārjuna.
The statement that one can attain nirvāṇa through the path of the sixteen aspects such as impermanence and so on is a statement with a special intention. The identifications of the afflictions in terms of that path also have a remainder. Based on those, one can understand pride and so on. One should understand that there are both imaginary and innate forms of ignorance, the view of the transitory collection, and the view of extremes. However, fearing excessive verbosity, I will not write about them.
Similarly, when conceptual thoughts that apprehend phenomena as truly existent are divided into nine degrees of great, medium, and small to be abandoned on the path of meditation, they are matched with the nine levels of the path of meditation as their antidotes. Likewise, when conceptual thoughts that apprehend subject and object as different substantial entities are divided into nine degrees of great, medium, and small to be abandoned on the path of meditation, they are matched with the nine levels of the path of meditation as their antidotes. These teachings should be understood as provisional in meaning, given for the sake of certain disciples who, for the time being, are unable to realize the subtle and coarse aspects of the selflessness of phenomena in their entirety.
These entities deceive the childish, who perceive them as having intrinsic existence when they do not. For the three types of persons mentioned above, however, these entities are merely conventional truths, since they are dependent arisings of fabricated things.
Because they still experience the mere ignorance that is not afflicted but is characterized by cognitive obscurations, noble ones who are in the postmeditation state and whose field of experience is endowed with appearances are affected by ignorance and its habitual tendencies. This is not the case for noble ones who are in the meditative equipoise state and whose field of experience is free from appearances. What, then, does this system consider to be cognitive obscurations? As the Madhyamakavatara-bhāsya says: The habitual tendencies of ignorance are the obstacles to the complete understanding of objects of knowledge. The habitual tendencies of desire and so on are the causes of such physical and verbal engagement. These habitual tendencies of ignorance and desire are eliminated in a buddha who is omniscient, but not in anyone else. As for physical and verbal engagement, it is like the behavior of arhats, such as jumping around like a monkey or calling someone a whore, even though they have been told by the Buddha to stop such bad behavior.
The word 'also' indicates that the habitual tendencies of attachment and so forth are also obstacles to the elimination of the knowable. Therefore, the habitual tendencies of the afflictions are obscurations to knowledge, and all the aspects of mistaken dualistic appearances that are the results of those are also included in that category.
From among the two types of latent tendencies—those that are seeds of the afflictions and those that are not seeds of the afflictions—the latter is posited as the cognitive obscuration. Although the apprehension of true existence does not arise due to the exhaustion of all seeds of the afflictions, the mind that is mistaken with regard to the appearing object arises due to the contamination of latent tendencies.
Since noble beings who have not attained buddhahood have not eliminated the ignorance that is the cognitive obscuration, they have alternating periods of conceptual thought involving appearances in postmeditation and periods of nonappearance in meditative equipoise. Buddhas, however, have fully and completely awakened to the ultimate and conventional aspects of all phenomena. Because they have realized them directly, all the movements of conceptual thought of mind and mental factors have completely ceased. Therefore, they do not have alternating periods of conceptual thought involving appearances in meditative equipoise and postmeditation.
The word 'permanently' indicates that noble beings, when they emerge from meditative equipoise, are in a state of post-equipoise, and therefore they alternate between meditative equipoise and post-equipoise. Therefore, the fact that they still have the ignorance of the cognitive obscurations is not a reason for the presence of appearances, but rather a reason for the alternation between the presence and absence of appearances in meditative equipoise and post-equipoise.
The movement of mind and mental factors is taken to be conceptual thought. As the Clear Words states: Conceptual thought is the movement of mind. Because it is free from that, suchness is without conceptual thought. As is said in a sūtra: 'What is the ultimate truth? If there is no movement of mind, what need is there to mention words?'
The third is as follows: The ultimate truth of ordinary beings is merely the conventional truth of the noble ones who have a domain of perception that is luminous. The emptiness that is the nature of that is the ultimate truth of those noble ones. The meaning of the first part of this statement is that the vase and so on that ordinary beings apprehend as ultimately established is merely the conventional truth of the three noble ones previously explained who have a domain of perception that is luminous and who have arisen from meditative equipoise. This statement eliminates the mere truth from the perspective of those noble ones, but it does not eliminate the truth being a conventional truth. It does not teach that the object of clinging of ordinary beings to the vase and so on as ultimately established becomes a conventional truth for the noble ones, because that is impossible.
The meaning of the latter part of the verse is that the nature of all dependently originated conventional phenomena is the ultimate reality for noble beings. Therefore, a single basis such as a vase is conventional in relation to ordinary beings and ultimate in relation to noble beings. Those who say this in reverse of what is stated in the text do not understand that whatever is conventional truth for a given mind must be invalidated as truth for that mind.
The ultimate truth of the buddhas is their own nature, and since that is nondeceptive, it is the ultimate truth. It is to be known by themselves.
The word 'only' in 'only the nature' is a term of exclusion, and what it excludes is the following: the ultimate truth of other noble beings is not like the alternating between the nature of non-appearance in meditative equipoise and the nature of appearance in post-equipoise attainment. Rather, it is the ultimate reality that is always in meditative equipoise on the nature.
The meaning of "that also" and so forth is that, wishing to teach that the truth of ultimate truth is not truly established, it is explained that it is truth in the sense of not deceiving in the perspective of one who sees suchness.
The second has two parts: (1) explanation of the meaning of the root text and (2) rebutting objections to that. ( 1) As for the first, in order to teach the ultimate truth, he says that since the ultimate truth cannot be expressed in words and is not an object of cognition that follows after words, it cannot be taught directly. In order to make its nature clear to those who wish to hear it, he gives an example of what ordinary beings experience. The meaning of the statement that it is not an object of cognition that follows after words is as stated in the translation by Nag-tsho: "It cannot be taught directly." The meaning of this is explained in the Clear Words commentary on the statement that the meaning of suchness is not to be known from another: "Just as when someone with cataracts is shown something by someone without cataracts, he does not understand the nature of the object as it is seen by the person without cataracts, but rather in a way that is distorted by the cataracts, so too when suchness is taught, one does not understand it as it is seen by someone free from the distortions of ignorance, but rather in a way that is distorted by ignorance." This statement does not mean that the ultimate truth cannot be taught by the definitive scriptures that have the meaning of the profound or by speech that teaches it, nor that it cannot be understood by the cognition that follows after words. All statements that the meaning of suchness is not an object of cognition should be understood in this way.
Due to the power of their diseased vision, people with diseased vision see hairs and so on in the interior of a horn cup or other vessel that they are holding in their hand. When they imagine that the hairs and so on are real, they want to remove them. They then take the trouble to repeatedly shake and turn the vessel, thinking that this will remove the hairs and so on.
When the person with clear vision approaches the person with blurred vision, he focuses his eyes on the place where the person with blurred vision saw the hairs, but he does not perceive the hairs. He does not think about the hairs or their special features. When the person with blurred vision tries to communicate his perception to the person with clear vision, saying, 'I see hairs,' the person with clear vision, wishing to dispel the mistaken perception of the person with blurred vision, will say, 'There are no hairs here.' However, the person with clear vision does not deny the existence of the hairs.
The true nature of the floating hairs seen by someone with diseased vision is what is seen by someone without diseased vision, not what is seen by someone with diseased vision. You should understand the meaning of this example in the following way. Those who have not seen reality because their minds have been affected by the diseased vision of ignorance perceive the intrinsic nature of the aggregates, elements, sense sources, and so on. This is the conventional nature of those aggregates and so on, like the floating hairs seen by someone with diseased vision.
The very objects that are observed by those who do not see the aggregates and so forth are seen by the buddhas, who are free from the habitual tendencies of ignorance and the cognitive obscurations, in the same way that a person with healthy eyes does not see falling hairs. The nature of the aggregates and so forth that is seen by those buddhas is the ultimate truth of those buddhas.
If, just as a person with healthy eyes does not see even the mere appearance of falling hairs, the buddhas do not see the conventional phenomena such as the aggregates that appear to a mind distorted by ignorance, these phenomena would not exist, for if they did exist, the buddhas would have to see them.
If the aggregates and so forth, which are conventional realities, did not exist, there would be no attainment of buddhahood, for the person who first generates the mind of awakening is one who is affected by ignorance. There is no such fault. The way in which the wisdom of a buddha knows all objects of knowledge is twofold: the way in which it knows all objects of knowledge that are ultimate truths and the way in which it knows all objects of knowledge that are conventional truths. As for the first, it is the knowledge of the suchness of those aggregates and so forth, which are conventional appearances, in the manner of not seeing them.
Second, since it is not appropriate to posit the realization of the inconceivable as a realization that does not appear, it must be known through appearance. Therefore, from the perspective of the wisdom that knows all that exists, it is known in the manner of appearing as subject and object.
Although the buddhas' knowledge of all aspects does not perceive the appearance of aggregates and so forth due to the contamination of the habitual tendencies of ignorance, the appearance to the consciousness of other persons contaminated by ignorance must appear to the buddhas. Without such an appearance, it would be impossible, and if such conventional appearances existed, they would have to be perceived by the knowledge of all aspects.
Although the hairs that appear to someone with diseased vision do not appear to someone with healthy vision, this does not mean that the latter lacks the appearance of hairs. This is not the case with the Buddha.
As long as the habitual tendencies of dualistic delusion have not been exhausted, the direct realization of the nature and the multiplicity of phenomena cannot arise in a single moment. Therefore, one must alternate between the two realizations. Thus, the two realizations cannot be realized in a single moment of wisdom. When all the habitual tendencies of delusion have been exhausted, the two wisdoms arise in a single moment of wisdom in an uninterrupted stream. Therefore, there is no need to alternate between the direct realization of the two types of phenomena. Thus, the statement that "In a single moment of wisdom, the entire sphere of knowledge is pervaded" is not contradictory.
Although the two wisdoms are of one essence, there is not the slightest contradiction in their being two different ways of knowing in relation to their two objects. This is a unique quality of the Buddha, the Blessed One. However, some people take only the way of knowing suchness to be the way of knowing of a buddha, and say that the way of knowing all phenomena is not present in the mind of a buddha but is included in the mind of a disciple. In this way, they deprecate the buddha's way of knowing all phenomena. Some others even deprecate both wisdoms, saying that the way of knowing suchness is not present in the mind of a buddha. Some of the rest of this will be explained in the section on the fruition.
If all dualistic appearances have disappeared, is it not that such a nature is not seen? Therefore, how do those buddhas see the ultimate truth? It is true that in the perspective of seeing suchness, dualistic appearances have disappeared, so they do not see in a dualistic manner. However, it is said that they see in a manner of not seeing. How this answers the objection is as follows. Because the wisdom that knows the way things really are directly sees the suchness of the aggregates and so on, and because the suchness of the aggregates and so on is their not being established in the perspective of seeing, it is necessary to see the suchness of the aggregates and so on in a manner of not seeing them. As the Bhāṣya says, "Because they directly realize the nature alone without touching on produced things, they are called buddhas, who have realized suchness." This statement that the wisdom that knows the ultimate truth sees the suchness of the aggregates and so on in a manner of not seeing them is equivalent to the statement that they see the suchness of the aggregates and so on in a manner of not seeing them.
The meaning of the statement "Not seeing is the highest seeing" is not that not seeing anything is considered seeing. Rather, as explained above, not seeing elaborations is posited as seeing the absence of elaborations. Therefore, seeing and not seeing are not taken as one and the same thing. The Sañcayagāthā says: Those who do not see forms, do not see feelings, Do not see discriminations, do not see intentions, And do not see consciousness, mind, and mental factors— They are said to see phenomena, as taught by the Tathāgata. Sentient beings say, "I see space." How do they see space? They should examine this. The Tathāgata taught that seeing phenomena is like this. Seeing cannot be explained by any other example. Here, not seeing is the five aggregates, and seeing is phenomena. This refers to suchness. As it is said, "Whoever sees dependent origination sees phenomena."
For example, space is merely the absence of obstructive contact. Seeing or realizing it is to see the absence of the object of refutation—obstructive contact—which would otherwise be perceptible. In this example, the seen space and the unseen obstructive contact are analogous to the seen blue and the unseen object of refutation, respectively. The final line of the verse refutes the view that the vision of suchness is like seeing blue without seeing it.
As a proof that he sees in a manner of not seeing, the Introduction to the Two Truths says: "Divine being, if the ultimate truth were by its very nature an object of body, speech, and mind, it would not be counted among the ultimate truths, but would be a conventional truth.
However, divine being, ultimately, the ultimate truth is beyond all conventions. It is without distinction, unborn, and unceasing. It is free from the object of speech, speech, the object of knowledge, and knowledge. The meaning of the earlier citation from the sūtra is that the ultimate truth is not seen by the vision of the ultimate truth in the perspective of one who sees the ultimate truth, as the conventional truth of the aggregates and so forth is seen. Rather, if the ultimate truth were to become an object of the body, speech, or mind, like the aggregates and so forth, then it would not be free from elaborations in the perspective of one who directly perceives suchness. Thus, it would not be the ultimate truth, but would be a conventional elaboration. If this is accepted, then it serves as a justification for the statement that the ultimate truth is seen in the manner of not seeing.
The meaning of the second sūtra is that in the perspective of directly perceiving the ultimate truth, the ultimate truth is without distinction, meaning that it is not differentiated into many different features. The other three are easy to understand.
It is easy to be free from the activities of speech in that vision.
The wisdom that directly perceives suchness is an understanding of the ultimate truth, and the ultimate truth is posited as its object. However, this does not contradict the fact that in the perspective of that wisdom there is no duality of object and agent. This is because the duality of object and agent is posited only in the perspective of conventional cognition. For example, although it is possible to posit a rational inference as the subject and the ultimate truth as its object, the duality of object and subject is not posited in the perspective of rational cognition. Then the god said, "The ultimate truth is beyond the object of omniscient wisdom endowed with the supreme of all aspects. It is not as it is said, 'This is the ultimate truth.'
All phenomena are false and deceptive. The meaning of this citation is as follows. Up to "because" explains how the ultimate truth is beyond the object of the omniscient wisdom. How it is beyond the object is explained from "just as" up to "not so." When the ultimate truth is spoken of, the conceptual thought that follows the sound appears as if there were a separation between subject and object. In the omniscient wisdom that knows the ultimate nature, it is beyond the object in that way. All phenomena that appear dualistically are false and deceptive. Therefore, in the perspective of the nondeceptive perception of suchness, they do not exist. These are the sources for the nonappearance of the conventional aggregates and so on in the perspective of the direct perception of suchness. Therefore, in the perspective of the direct perception of suchness, all elaborations of dualistic phenomena such as existence and nonexistence are not possible, because their own entities are not observed there. In this way, in the contemplation of suchness, only the noble ones are direct authorities, and the nonnoble ones are not direct authorities. Therefore, the world cannot invalidate the refutation of production from other in the perspective of the noble ones' perception of the ultimate truth.
If you wish to refute the worldly objection to the refutation of ultimate arising from other, and you accept that worldly perception is valid cognition in the context of analyzing reality, then since worldly people perceive reality directly, they would have to be accepted as having abandoned ignorance from beginningless time. So what use would there be for other noble ones to perceive reality directly? It would be pointless. It is also not reasonable for worldly people to be valid cognition with respect to reality. Therefore, since worldly perception is not valid cognition in any way in the context of analyzing reality, there is no refutation by worldly perception in the context of reality. Some people say that this system does not accept valid cognition at all, and others say that this system is excellent. Both of these people are merely expressing their own views without understanding the position of this master, because they have understood the statement that worldly perception is not valid cognition in any way with respect to reality to mean that valid cognition is not accepted in general.
As for valid cognition and the object of cognition, one must understand them as explained in Prasannapadā, where, having refuted their inherent existence, it explains how to posit valid cognition and the object of cognition in a manner that is mutually dependent. This will be explained below.
One may wonder, "How does the world invalidate?" If one uses worldly renown to refute a point that is established and renowned in the world, then that person will be invalidated by the world. For example, suppose someone says, "Someone stole my pot." Another person asks, "What is this 'pot'?" The first person replies, "It's a pot." The second person refutes, "A pot is not a thing, for it is a measurable object, just like a pot in a dream." In such cases, the world invalidates. However, when one relies on the noble ones' vision of ultimate truth and takes as authoritative those who are learned in the ultimate truth, then the world does not invalidate the establishment of reality.
The statement that "the wise should analyze other such points" is as follows: "I am the owner of the vase, and Devadatta is not the thief." And when asked, "What has grown in my field?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A sprout." And when asked, "What has grown?" he says, "A
Even while accepting arising from other in accordance with worldly renown, you have rejected worldly refutations. Now, since there is no arising from other even in worldly perception, we will show that there is no refutation from worldly views even when one wishes to refute arising from other.
When a teacher says, 'I have begotten this son,' he is referring to a male person with a male organ. However, this father does not take a male person with a male organ out of his own body and place him in the womb of the mother of the son. Instead, he merely deposits a little bit of impure substance, which is the seed of the son's body, in the womb of the mother.
Since the father of that son has poured the cause of his body into him, the world clearly understands that the seed and the son are not different entities that exist by their own intrinsic nature. Therefore, the idea that the seed's impurity and the son are different entities, or that the barley seed and the sprout are different entities, does not even exist in the world.
If the child were inherently different from the parents, then the parents would not be able to point to the child and say, 'I have produced this.' Similarly, when a tree grows from a seed that was planted, people think, 'I planted this tree.' So, as before, one should understand that there is no arising from another in the world. Although the seed that was planted is not the tree and the child is not the seed, when a tree grows from the seed that was planted and a child is born from the parents, the parents can point to them and say, 'I have produced these.' This is like the case of a person who is not his hand but who can say that he is sick or well because his hand is sick or well.
Thus, although there is no arising from other in worldly convention, the existence of arising from other cannot be refuted by worldly perception. For the refutation of inherently different cause and effect requires definitely relying on the reasoning that analyzes suchness. Therefore, the meaning of the other philosophers' acceptance of arising from other is that it is arising from other that is established by intrinsic identity, and not merely that they are established as different entities. And that is not something that is not established in the perspective of the world.
"There is no arising from another even in the world" does not merely mean that ordinary people do not apprehend the causes and effects of such things as seeds and sprouts as inherently different. Rather, it should be understood to mean that there is no arising from another even conventionally. This is also clear from the commentary on the refutation of arising from both, which states: "Just as it was shown above that arising from self and other is not reasonable either in the conventional or ultimate sense, so too is it not possible for the proponents of both [self and other] according to the reasoning that has been explained. "
The Prasannapadā also says: "If things do not arise from self, other, both, or without a cause, how is it that the Blessed One said, 'Conditioned by ignorance, karmic formations arise'?" In response to this, it is said: "This is conventional truth, not ultimate truth." Thus it is said that ignorance giving rise to karmic formations and so on is conventional, not ultimate.
In response to the question, "Is the conventional presentation to be expressed?" it is said, "We accept the establishment of the conventional merely through these conditions, not through accepting the four alternatives." This clearly states that even though one accepts arising conventionally in dependence upon these conditions, one does not accept arising in terms of the four alternatives. Therefore, the statement that in this system arising from other is not refuted conventionally is an explanation that does not understand this system well.
Thus, in the absence of inherently established entities, as explained above, the third quality is that, by establishing dependent origination as free from eternalism and nihilism, one does not fall into the extremes of eternalism and nihilism. This is explained as follows. If the sprout were inherently different from the seed, then, since the two, seed and sprout, would not be cause and effect, there would be no doubt that even while the sprout exists, the seed would be annihilated. In this case, since the connection between the seed and the sprout would be severed, the existence of the sprout would not benefit the continuity of the seed lineage. For example, the existence of a heifer does not benefit the noncessation of the lineage of a dead bull. And the existence of an ordinary being does not benefit the noncessation of the noble ones' cutting off the cycle of existence.
Since, in the position that the sprout is not inherently different from the seed, there is no contradiction in their being cause and effect, the seed is destroyed when the sprout exists, and so there is no annihilation, since the seed's continuum is severed.
Since it has been explained many times that the seed ceases at the time of the sprout, the commentary explains the meaning of the seed having ceased as the seed having been interrupted, and it is said that the seed does not perish. Therefore, the statement that the seed has ceased is to be understood as the lineage of the seed having been interrupted.
Since the seed and the sprout do not exist as one and the same, the seed does not transfer into the sprout. Therefore, since it has been refuted that the seed is not destroyed at the time of the sprout, it is also refuted that the seed exists at the time of the sprout. This is the meaning of the following from the Lalitavistara: When there is a seed, a sprout arises in the same way. The seed is not the sprout. It is not other than that, nor is it that. Thus, it is neither permanent nor annihilated. If there is a seed, a sprout arises from it as its cause. If it is thought that since the sprout does not arise from anything other than the seed, the seed and the sprout are of the same nature, this is refuted. The reason is that the sprout is not inherently different from the seed, nor is it of the same nature as the seed. When these two alternatives are refuted, the nature of the sprout is shown to be free from permanence and annihilation. This is also explained in the same sūtra: Formations are conditioned by ignorance. Formations do not exist in reality. Formations and ignorance are both empty. They are free from movement. The first line explains that formations arise in dependence on ignorance. The second line states the conclusion that formations do not exist in reality. The third line shows that both cause and effect are empty. The fourth line explains the way in which they are empty. Movement is the act of formation. They are free from movement, meaning that formations are empty of formations.
This also teaches the qualification of the object of negation: 'free from being inherently established.' This is similar in meaning to 'nonexistent in reality.' The meaning of that sūtra is also taught in the Treatise on the Middle Way: Whatever arises in dependence on something Is not that thing itself. It is not other than that thing. Therefore it is neither permanent nor annihilated.
The fourth has two parts: refutation of the assertion that there is intrinsically identifiable status, and rebutting objections to the refutation. The first has three parts: refutation by the consequence that the meditative equipoise of the noble ones would be a cause of the destruction of things, refutation by the consequence that conventional truth would withstand rational analysis, and refutation by the consequence that ultimate production would not be refuted. As it is said, "It is definitely necessary to accept that no phenomenon whatsoever is produced intrinsically," it is appropriate to say that this point must definitely be accepted. One should not say the opposite, that it is not appropriate to posit an acceptance of this.
If, on the other hand, the intrinsic nature of form, feeling, and so on were to arise in dependence upon causes and conditions, then when yogis directly realize that phenomena are empty of intrinsic existence, they would realize emptiness in a way that denies the existence of the intrinsic nature of things. For the yogis in meditative equipoise must not perceive form and so on, and if these things existed by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, they would have to be perceived in meditative equipoise, but they are not perceived. Therefore, at that time, those things would not exist. If they did not exist, they would be destroyed, that is, they would have existed before meditative equipoise but would have been destroyed afterward. Therefore, since meditative equipoise would have to be the cause of such destruction, just as a hammer and so on is the cause of the destruction of a pot and so on, seeing emptiness would also be the cause of the destruction of the intrinsic nature of things and the denial of its existence. But this is not reasonable. Therefore, since things do not exist by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, one should not accept that they arise inherently at all times.
Those Madhyamikas who accept arising that is established by way of its own character assert that even though things are established by way of their own character, they do not thereby become truly established. Therefore, they say that if form and so forth were established by way of their own character, it would not be necessary for them to be perceived by direct perception by one who sees suchness. However, as previously explained and as will be explained again by reasoning, this does not enable them to avoid the fault that merely being established by way of its own character is already true establishment.
Here the commentary quotes the following from the Ratnakūṭa Sūtra: Kāśyapa, moreover, correct discernment of phenomena through the middle way is as follows: emptiness does not make phenomena empty. Phenomena themselves are emptiness. And it quotes similar statements about the absence of marks, the absence of wishes, the absence of conditioning, the absence of arising, and the absence of coming into existence. If phenomena had essential or intrinsic existence, phenomena would not be empty of themselves, and it would not be correct to say that phenomena themselves are emptiness. If essential or intrinsic existence were not refuted, it would be necessary to teach emptiness by way of something else being empty, and this would contradict the statement that emptiness does not make phenomena empty. Therefore, when the middle way correctly discerns the essential nature of phenomena, it teaches that phenomena are empty of essential or intrinsic existence.
This sūtra refutes the Vijñaptika view that the dependent nature is not empty of existence by way of its own character and that it is empty of the apprehended and apprehender being different substantial entities. The Catuḥśataka also explains the meaning of the above sūtra: The Tathāgatas have said that those who think, 'I will attain nirvāṇa, which is mine,' and who have wrong views do not attain nirvāṇa. And those who have the view of emptiness are said to be incapable of attaining it. The Mūlamadhyamakakārikā also says: The Victor has said that all views of emptiness are certain to be released. Those who have the view of emptiness are said to be incapable of attaining it.
This is also the intended meaning of the statement that phenomena are empty of their own entities. However, the statement that a pot is empty of true existence, not empty of pot, is an instance of other-emptiness. Therefore, to say that a pot is empty of pot is self-emptiness. This is completely incorrect. If a pot were empty of pot, there would be no pot in the pot. If something did not exist in itself, it would not exist in anything else, so the pot would be completely nonexistent. Since all other entities would be the same, there would be no one to make such a statement. There would be no way to posit anything as empty of this or not empty of that. Some people say that such emptiness is real, while others consider it to be nihilistic emptiness. Both of these views are outside the teachings of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, who have repeatedly proven that dependent origination is free from the extremes of eternalism and nihilism.
In particular, they say that all conventional truths must be established as empty of themselves. They assert that this is nihilistic emptiness, but this is completely incorrect. No one among the four schools of tenets knows that view to be a nihilistic view and generates it in their mind-stream. Therefore, although the bases of refutation are similar in being empty of the object of refutation, the way in which the bases are empty of the object of refutation is different. The emptiness of phenomena being established by way of their own character is the meaning of being empty of their own entity. The reasons why the other modes of emptiness are not empty of their own entity are as follows. As long as the former emptiness is established by valid cognition and its function is not impaired, it is impossible for the superimposition to arise that the basis of refutation is truly established or exists in the sense of being truly established. Even though the latter emptinesses are established by valid cognition and their function is not impaired, it is not contradictory for the tenets to be truly established or to exist in the sense of being truly established.
Here one may object, "Although it is true that arising is ultimately nonexistent, and therefore arising from self and other is refuted, the nature of form, feeling, and so on, which are observed by the two types of valid cognition, must arise from other causes without a doubt. If this is not accepted, why speak of two truths? There would be only one truth. Therefore arising from other does exist."
This is because the opponent appears to assert that there is no arising ultimately, but that there is arising from another conventionally. Therefore, this is some kind of Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
If you do not accept that there is any arising of other things that is intrinsically real, there would be only one truth. This means that if there were no arising of things that is intrinsically real even conventionally, there would be no correct conventional truth. In that case, since conventional truth would be impossible, there would be only ultimate truth. In response to this, the text says, "This is true, but ultimately there are not two truths. Monks, this ultimate truth is one: it is the nondeceptive phenomenon of nirvāṇa."
Because it is said, 'All formations are false and deceptive.' The meaning of this is that the truth that one accepts is nondeceptive, so it is only nondeceptive truth that is true. Therefore, it is said, 'It is true here.'
"In the ultimate sense" means that in the perspective of one who sees reality, there are not two truths, conventional and ultimate, because in that perspective it is said that there is only the ultimate truth. "Supreme truth" is the ultimate truth. That conventional truth does not exist in the perspective of that wisdom is known from the statement that it is deceptive.
In brief, if phenomena were established by their own characteristics, compounded phenomena would not be established as false and deceptive, and there would be no conventional truth. Thus, there would be no two truths. On the other hand, on the position that there is no establishment by way of intrinsic characteristics, there are both conventional and ultimate truths.
If one thinks that since the previous scriptural statement says that only nirvāṇa is true and other conditioned phenomena are false, conditioned phenomena are not established by their own characteristics, but nirvāṇa, the ultimate truth, is established by its own characteristics, this is not so. The truth of nirvāṇa is explained in the sūtras as having the quality of nondeception, but it is not explained as being inherently established truth.
Since it is said that all formations are false and deceptive, it is understood that the truth of the former is the meaning of nondeception.
The commentary on the Sixty Reasonings also explains that just as conditioned phenomena are false appearances that deceive the childish, so too is nirvāṇa a false appearance that does not deceive. Therefore, it is said that nirvāṇa is true and the others are false. Thus, it must be accepted that the distinction between true and false refers to the meaning of deceptive and nondeceptive.
The commentary on the Sixty Reasonings says that nirvāṇa is conventionally true. This means that nirvāṇa, which exists as an ultimate truth, is posited from the perspective of conventional truth. It does not mean that it is conventionally true. Thus, since conventional truth is a method for entering ultimate truth, just as the Followers of the Middle Way conventionally accept arising from self and other without analysis, in accordance with the ways of the world, so too do they conventionally accept the other aspects of conventional truth.
For when one examines whether things like form and feeling arise from themselves or from something else, one does not find any other part that arises, ceases, and so on. Therefore, one should not examine the conventional truth of the world in terms of whether things arise from themselves or something else. Instead, one should accept the conventional truth of the world as it is seen by the world, saying only, 'When this exists, that arises.' One should do this in order to engage with the world. As Āryadeva said: Just as one cannot teach a barbarian in his language, So one cannot teach the world without using the world's conventions. And as it is said in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā: Without relying on conventions, One cannot understand the ultimate truth. Without understanding the ultimate truth, One cannot attain nirvāṇa. And in the Vigrahavyāvartanī: Without accepting conventions, We do not make any statements.
Here, the analysis and non-analysis are the analysis and non-analysis of suchness. Moreover, it is important to know from what point of analysis on one enters into the analysis of suchness. If one explains this a little, the Consequentialist system posits that one enters into the analysis of suchness when one seeks the referent object of the designation, asking whether the referent object of the designation "The sprout arises" arises from itself or from another. Therefore, one should understand that this is completely different from the analysis of worldly conventions, such as "Where did it come from? Where did it go?" and "Where is the inner and the outer?"
Svātantrika Madhyamaka does not begin to investigate suchness until that point. Rather, as previously explained, it begins to investigate suchness after having investigated whether something exists by virtue of appearing to cognition or whether it exists in the way it is established from the side of the object, independently of appearing to cognition. This is because the key point of identifying the object of negation is different, so there are two different ways of beginning to investigate suchness. Not understanding this, some people take the example of Devadatta not actually coming to this place but being mistaken about having come, and then, upon investigation, being found out to have not come. They then take this to mean that all presentations that are not investigated are only mistaken, while those that are investigated are not mistaken. This is not the system of any Prāsaṅgika or Svātantrika Madhyamaka. According to both systems, there are many things established by valid cognition in the context of presentations that are not investigated. I will not elaborate further, as I have explained this in detail elsewhere.
If one examines conventional phenomena with the reasoning that examines reality, one should understand that all worldly conventions will be undermined.
If, when all clinging to the truth of entities is cut through, one still fears that one must posit some entity that is established by its own intrinsic characteristics as the cause of bondage and liberation in terms of the origination and cessation of suffering, then one is left with nothing but words.
Why? Just as the reasoning explained above does not make sense for the arising of form and so on from self and other in the context of analyzing the ultimate truth of suchness, in the same way, that very reasoning does not make sense for arising even conventionally. Therefore, how could the arising of intrinsic existence be established by any valid cognition? It could not. Therefore, one must accept, even if one does not want to, that arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristics does not exist in either of the two truths. This statement shows that the arising that is refuted even conventionally by the reasoning analyzing suchness is the arising of a material nature. In the summary, it is explained as above. Therefore, the qualification "by virtue of intrinsic characteristics" is applied only to the object of refutation, not to arising in general. This is because it has been stated many times that ultimate analysis is not applicable to conventional phenomena.
If the reasoning that analyzes reality cannot refute arising that is established by its own characteristics conventionally, then it cannot refute arising that is ultimately established. This is because as soon as something is established by its own characteristics, it becomes truly established. Therefore, whether or not the qualification "conventionally" is applied to the object of refutation makes no difference. In this way, there are countless qualifications such as "by its own characteristics," "by its own nature," and "by its own entity" that are applied to the object of refutation in the sūtras and in the texts of the two masters and this master. When such qualifications are refuted, some Mādhyamikas are refuted. As explained above, the Prasannapadā also says: This must be accepted as it is. Otherwise, the conventional would not be tenable. Therefore, it would become reality and not the conventional. This means that if the object of refutation is not satisfied with merely being designated conventionally, but instead is refuted when the referent of the designation is sought, then it becomes ultimately existent. This applies to those who do not accept that form and so on are ultimately established and who posit them as conventional. This cannot be the realist, so it is very clear that this refers to the Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
Here, the master explains that some people, such as Āryavimuktisena, claim that the scriptural statements such as “It does not arise from itself, nor from something other than itself” refute the imaginary arising and so on, but do not refute the true existence of the dependent nature. However, since there is no logical reasoning to support such an interpretation, those who make such claims are only open to refutation and examination. Some earlier scholars say that the opponent in this argument is the master Sthiramati and others, but there is no such statement in their texts.
Since the master Dharmottara is said to have interpreted the Four Hundred Kārikās as Cittamātra in his commentary on the Four Hundred Kārikās, it is appropriate to apply this to him.
If one asks how the commentaries on the profound sūtras that explain the meaning of the noble Nāgārjuna's texts in terms of Cittamātra explain the meaning of the noble Nāgārjuna's texts, it does not appear clearly in the texts of the great masters such as Ācārya Vasubandhu that they explain the meaning of Nāgārjuna's texts in this way. However, in the Rational System of Exposition and so forth, they appear to explain the Prajñāpāramitā sūtras as interpretable in meaning based on the Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra. Therefore, it is clear that they explain [Nāgārjuna's texts] in this way. It is impossible that they would refute the noble Nāgārjuna's texts. If they explained them literally, they would not explain the Prajñāpāramitā sūtras literally. If they explained them as interpretable in meaning literally, they would have to explain their meaning in terms of Cittamātra.
However, since the statements that all phenomena are ultimately nonestablished and not established by way of their own characteristics are established by reasoning in accordance with their literal meaning, they cannot be interpreted as having a different, indirect meaning. Therefore, [the text] says that they are to be taken literally and are to be examined and investigated. It teaches that there are limitless arguments in favor of taking the statements literally and against taking them indirectly, and it establishes that the meaning of the text cannot be interpreted in any other way. Therefore, it does not say much about this.
If arising that is established by its own characteristics does not exist in either of the two truths, then forms and so on would not exist. In that case, the entities of forms and so on would not be observed in the world in eye consciousness and so on. Otherwise, even the horns of a rabbit and so on would appear in eye consciousness and so on, for the reasons would be completely equivalent. In response to this, it is said that empty things, that is, false reflections and so on, including echoes and so on, arise in dependence on and in reliance on the assemblage of causes and conditions, such as a mirror, a face, a cave, and a sound. They are not unknown in the world; they are known. Just as they are known in the world, false reflections and so on give rise to eye consciousness and so on that have the aspect of the reflection and so on.
Just as a false cognition arises with a false appearance from a false reflection, so too do effects that are empty of intrinsic existence arise from causes that are empty of intrinsic existence. Here, the statement that an eye consciousness apprehending a reflection arises means that the reflection is a phenomenon, distinct from the consciousness, and therefore an external object. It is also the objective condition of the eye consciousness, and so is accepted as a form sense sphere. The same applies to the appearance of two moons, floating hairs, illusions, echoes, and so on. In this way, the reflection, the two moons, the floating hairs, and so on that appear to mistaken sense consciousnesses are like intrinsic existence appearing to the five sense consciousnesses that are not affected by any temporary impairment of the sense faculties.
Although the face and so forth are impossible, they appear as such. This is similar to the appearance of intrinsic existence, which is impossible.
Since reflections and echoes and so on are similar to form, sound, and so on, although the five sense objects such as form are not posited as external due to their intrinsic existence, the form and so on that appear as such are posited as external. Similarly, although reflections and so on are not posited as external due to being the face and so on, reflections and so on are posited as external. Thus, the two are similar in that they are and are not posited as external.
The falsity of a reflection being empty of a face is established by all worldly elders who are familiar with conventional language and have not directed their minds toward any scripture or reasoning that teaches emptiness. Therefore, it is completely unreasonable to assert that such an understanding is a coarse rational cognition.
If that is so, then even though a reflection is known to be false, it does not establish the falsity posited by the Mādhyamika. So how can the former be an example of the latter? In this context, reflections and such are used as examples because they are already established in the world. They are not used as examples of something already established as false by the Mādhyamika.
The reflection of a face is like a face. It is impossible to distinguish between the parts of it that appear to be a face and the parts that do not appear to be a face. Although it is empty of existing in the way that it appears, it is not contradictory for it to arise in dependence upon its causes. In the same way, when blue appears to be established by its own characteristics, it appears as if there are no parts of it that appear to be inherently established and parts that do not appear to be inherently established. Although it is empty of existing in the way that it appears, it is not contradictory for it to arise from its causes and for it to give rise to effects. If you can posit a reflection of a face as something that does not exist in the way that it appears, you will be able to posit blue as something that exists even though it does not exist in the way that it appears.
The wise should not be satisfied with a mere understanding of the two aspects of refutation and non-refutation with regard to form and so on, as exemplified by the reflection. This is indispensable for the attainment of the Madhyamaka view. Therefore, the commentary also says: 'Even though the cause and effect of a reflection are without intrinsic existence, what wise person would think that form, feeling, and so on, which are not different from cause and effect, are inherently existent, just because they are observed to exist? Therefore, even though they are observed to exist, they do not arise inherently. Thus, it is clearly stated that existence and inherent existence are different, and that arising and inherent arising are different. If these are not distinguished, then as long as a thing exists, it must exist inherently, according to those who maintain that things exist inherently. When it lacks inherent existence, it is completely nonexistent, like the horn of a donkey. Thus, they do not go beyond the two extremes. Therefore, all their wishes are difficult to fulfill. Thus, the absence of inherent existence allows for the positing of causes and effects, and so they are free from the extreme of nonexistence. This is the special feature of the commentaries of Buddhapālita and Candrakīrti on the thought of the noble Nāgārjuna. Therefore, it is very important to distinguish the two kinds of existence and the two kinds of nonexistence.
The example of a reflection is explained in the Meeting of Father and Son Sutra: Just as a reflection appears In a very clear mirror, Without any reality, So should you understand all phenomena. You should understand how to apply the other examples of falsity in the same way as above.
The fifth has two parts: the quality of being able to easily abandon the views of eternalism and nihilism and the quality of the connection between actions and their effects being highly tenable. The first is as follows. Because all things are like reflections, empty of inherent existence, they do not exist inherently in either of the two truths, the ultimate and the conventional. Therefore, forms and so on are not inherently established permanent phenomena. Not only that, they are also not inherently established impermanent phenomena. As for the meaning of impermanence, it is as explained in the context of the destruction of the seed at the time of the sprout. In the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā it is said: "It was before, but now it is not," so it follows that there is annihilation. This means that if one accepts that things exist inherently and then asserts that a previously existing thing later becomes nonexistent or is destroyed, this is a view of annihilation. For if one accepts that things exist inherently, then whether one asserts that they are permanent or impermanent, one will fall into the views of eternalism and nihilism.
Here, the commentary states: "As the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā says, 'The Teacher emanates an emanation, and that emanation emanates another emanation. Similarly, the agent, the action, and the object of the action are like those emanations.' This shows that things that lack intrinsic existence arise from things that lack intrinsic existence. This statement shows that all actions and agents are posited in the absence of intrinsic existence, and so there is no nihilism."
If here, conventionally, establishment by way of its own character is not refuted, the extremely subtle selflessness is not realized, and so the extremely subtle views of permanence and annihilation do not arise in one's continuum, it is difficult to abandon all views of permanence and annihilation. Therefore, the abandonment of all views of permanence and annihilation is the benefit of refuting that object of refutation conventionally. If its conventional existence is refuted, one does not fall into the views of permanence and annihilation in dependence upon the ultimate, and not only that, one is not tainted by the stains of the views of permanence and annihilation in dependence upon the conventional. Therefore, there is the benefit of the ease of abandoning the views of permanence and annihilation.
The second has three parts: showing that there is no need to accept a foundation consciousness and so on when one does not accept intrinsic existence, showing an example of how effects arise from ceased actions, and rebutting objections to these teachings. The first has three parts: explaining the transitional text, explaining the meaning of the root text, and explaining the points that branch off from it. The first is as follows: Not only does this view, which is devoid of intrinsic existence in both truths, avoid the views of eternalism and nihilism, it also makes it possible to connect the effects of actions even after a long time has passed since the actions ceased, without having to posit a foundation consciousness, a continuum of mind, a nonannihilation, or an acquisition. This shows that not only does the view that there is no intrinsic existence even conventionally avoid the views of eternalism and nihilism, it also has the advantage of making it possible to connect the effects of actions even without accepting a foundation consciousness and so on.
Although there is not even an atom established by intrinsic identity in the way of commenting on the texts of the noble ones, there is a unique way of commenting that allows one to posit all actions and agents. In dependence on this unique way of commenting, there are many ways of commenting on pure tenets that are not shared with other commentators. What are they? If I were to mention the main ones, they are: (1) the existence of a foundation consciousness that is a different entity from the six collections of consciousness, (2) the unique way of refuting reflexive awareness, and (3) the rejection of the idea that the view of suchness can be generated in the continuum of the opponent through autonomous syllogisms. (4) Just as consciousness is accepted, external objects must also be accepted. (5) Hearers and solitary realizers have the realization that phenomena lack intrinsic existence. (6) Grasping at the self of phenomena is posited as an affliction. (7) Disintegratedness is a phenomenon. (8) Because of this, there is a unique way of positing the three times. The first of these is taught in this context. The way in which the rejection of reflexive awareness leads to the rejection of intrinsic existence will be explained.
The way in which the rejection of the self-sufficient person is based on this [reasoning] has been explained in detail elsewhere, and a brief explanation will be given here as well.
The fifth also comes down to this. As will be explained, this is what Buddhapālita meant when he said that the self that does not exist in the statement in the śrāvakas' piṭakas that "all phenomena are selfless" is established by its own essence. This is also the meaning of the complete character of selflessness. Therefore, the complete character of the selflessness of persons must be taken to mean that persons do not exist by way of their own essence. The key point is that realizing this correctly also requires realizing the complete character of the selflessness of phenomena. If that were so, one would have to accept that the apprehension of the self of phenomena is definitely an affliction. Therefore, there are many differences, such as the two ways of identifying afflictions as either coarse or subtle, the two ways of accepting whether one is liberated by the path of the sixteen aspects such as impermanence, and the different points at which one eliminates the obstructions to omniscience.
Well then, it must be accepted by both Madhyamaka schools that it is possible for someone who has first entered the Mahāyāna and has well established the view of suchness to fall into the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha vehicles. If so, it must be accepted that such a person will directly realize the selflessness of phenomena by meditating on it and will cultivate what has already been seen. If so, it must be accepted that this path abandons the imaginary grasping at the self of phenomena from the path of seeing and that it also abandons the innate grasping at the self of phenomena from the path of meditation. So I wonder whether even in the Madhyamaka system that accepts that phenomena are established by way of their own nature, it is accepted that there are two types of grasping at the self of phenomena, one that is afflictive and one that is not. Although this is not clearly explained, it must be accepted that Cittamātra followers who meditate on the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha paths in this way will temporarily abandon the manifest grasping at the self of phenomena, but without the support of an infinite accumulation of merit, they will not abandon the seeds of either of the two types of grasping at the self of phenomena. Therefore, it must be said that it is possible for śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas to temporarily abandon the manifest cognitive obscurations, but it is not possible for them to abandon their seeds.
According to this master, since the apprehension of a self of phenomena is an affliction, there is no need for the support of an infinite accumulation of merit to abandon its seeds. However, in order to purify the cognitive obscurations that are the habitual tendencies of mistaken dualistic appearances, there is no way to purify them without such support. Since it appears that there is a very great difference in understanding between the above explanations, I have explained them.
How is it that, in the position that accepts that things are not inherently established, the connection between actions and their effects is valid even without accepting the foundation consciousness and so on? All Buddhist schools, both higher and lower, accept that happiness and suffering and so on arise from virtuous and nonvirtuous actions, even when there is a long time between the action and its effect. If the action remains until just before the effect arises, it would be permanent. But since a permanent thing cannot perform a function, the connection between action and effect would not be valid.
If the action ceases in the second moment after it has been performed, then until the moment immediately before the result is produced, the action does not exist. And since the cessation of the action is also a nonentity, how can a result arise from an action? In response to this objection, some maintain that there is a foundation consciousness to which the power of the action is imparted at the moment when the action is about to cease, just before the action ceases in the second moment after it has been performed. Others maintain that there is a separate entity called nonwastage, which is neither a mental factor nor a physical entity, and which is like a promissory note for a debt.
Some think that the attainment of the two karmas is a nonassociated factor that is distinct from those two.
Some conceive of the continuum of consciousness as being impregnated with the latent tendencies of karma. Therefore, they assert that even though karma has ceased, it is not contradictory for it to produce a result after a long time. They say that karma imprints latent tendencies on the foundation consciousness, and that the result of karma is the latent tendency. They say that the result is produced by the continuum of similar types of latent tendencies, and that the result is thus produced by the continuum of the result of the original karma. The other three views should be understood in the same way. The first view is that of some Cittamātra. The second view is that of the Vaibhāṣika, according to Avalokitavrata. It is a view that is different from that of the Kashmiri Vaibhāṣika. The third view is also that of a subsect of the Vaibhāṣika. Although it is not clear which view the fourth view represents, according to the ninth chapter of the Abhidharmakosha-bhāsya, it seems to be the view of the Sautrantika and the Kashmiri Vaibhāṣika.
Although the Kashmiri Vaibhāṣikas accept that obtainment occurs, they do not assert that obtainment is produced by two factors—the object obtained and obtainment itself. However, the Abhidharmikas of this school do assert this, as is clear from the phrase "according to those who say."
According to the Mādhyamika Prāsaṅgika, who maintain that actions are not produced by their own intrinsic nature, it is not contradictory for a result to arise from an action that is intrinsically unceased and has not ceased by its own intrinsic nature. Therefore, even without accepting a foundation consciousness and so on, it is possible for a result to arise from an action. Thus, you should understand that even though the two actions performed in a sentient being's continuum have ceased and a long time has passed—many eons—a result arises from the action. You should understand that the result is correct in the sense that the result is not mistaken with respect to its cause. In this way, the connection between actions and results is very well established in this system. As before, the four proponents of answers to the above arguments maintain that actions are produced and cease by virtue of their own intrinsic characteristics and that after an action has been performed, its cessation is established by virtue of its own intrinsic nature.
Although this master's opponents may respond that there is no fault because they accept the foundation consciousness and so on, this is refuted by the argument that there is no inherently established arising and ceasing of actions.
To show that this very way of answering is what the noble Nāgārjuna intended, he quotes the following from the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā: Because karma is not produced, Because it has no intrinsic existence, And because it is not produced, It does not perish. This means that because karma is not established by intrinsic existence, it is not produced by its own intrinsic nature. Therefore, since it is impossible for karma to cease by intrinsic existence, it is not reasonable to conceive of the idea that after the karma has been performed and ceased, it persists by intrinsic existence and does not perish.
Although this reasoning was stated in the context of refuting the idea of indestructible karma, it is equally applicable to the refutation of the other three types of karma, for the reasons are entirely similar.
Moreover, a sūtra is cited: "The lifespan of humans is one hundred years, and it is said that they live that long, but there is no heap of aggregates in a year. That accomplishment is also like that. ' Inexhaustible' is what is said, and 'exhaustion of karma' is what is said. In the manner of emptiness, there is no exhaustion. Exhaustion is taught in the manner of convention." This is a source showing that there is no exhaustion or cessation that is inherently established, and that those two are posited through the force of convention.
In Naktso's translation, the line reads: "One should view this accumulation as well as the heap of years that is nonexistent." These are explained in terms of their natural state, which is to say, their unceasing state.
The third has two parts: how the nonexistence of inherent cessation can be used as a reason for not accepting the foundation consciousness and how, even without accepting the foundation consciousness, one can posit a basis for the habitual tendencies. The first is as follows: Suppose one argued as follows: Even though there is no inherently established cessation, in our own system we do accept that, in some cases, actions cease. As it is said, "Even though they cease and do not inherently exist," and "It is taught that they are exhausted in conventional terms." Thus, after an action has been done, one must accept that it ceases. At that point, cessation is not a real thing, and we do not accept the foundation consciousness or anything else as a basis for the connection between actions and their effects. Therefore, the earlier answers are not sufficient. There is no problem. Because of the reason "since it does not inherently cease," the later effect can arise from the disintegration of the action that has disintegrated. Therefore, no separate answer is given.
This is the key point that in all positions that assert that things are inherently established, destruction cannot be a thing, whereas in the Middle Way position that asserts that things are not inherently established, destruction can be established as a thing. In the first system, when a thing such as a sprout has ceased, all the parts of the sprout have ceased, and no other thing such as a pot has been obtained. Therefore, they assert that destruction is not a thing at all. They think that destruction cannot be a thing because it cannot be exemplified by any of the sense objects such as blue, or by any collection of its own parts such as a pot. In the second system, for example, there is no single thing that is either the five aggregates of Upasena or the collection of those five aggregates, or something different from those two that could be posited as the exemplification of Upasena. Upasena is not any of those three, but it is not contradictory for the designation of Upasena in dependence upon his aggregates to be a thing. Similarly, even though there is no exemplification of either the thing that has ceased or a thing of a similar type, destruction is a thing because it arises in dependence upon the thing that has ceased.
In proving this, the Prasannapadā states two arguments, one from scripture and one from reasoning. The first is from the Daśabhūmika Sūtra: "Because of birth, there is aging and death." Here it is said that death is the destruction of the sentient being who has died, and that it is produced by birth. Also, in the same text it is said that death performs two functions: it destroys the aggregates and it causes the continuous production of ignorance. Thus it is said that death performs two functions: it is produced by causes and it produces ignorance. Therefore, a destroyed thing can be produced by causes and can produce an effect. This is true even for momentary destruction, and it is also taught that the first moment is the cause of the second moment's destruction. Thus, the existence of a sentient being and its death, the first moment not remaining in the second moment, and the first moment not remaining in the second moment are all equivalent in terms of whether they are posited as entities and whether they are produced by causes.
In consideration of this, the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā says: "Entity and nonentity are conditioned phenomena," and the Yuktiṣaṣṭikā also says: "Peace is the exhaustion of causes. It is called 'exhaustion.' " Thus, both the entity of a sprout and its nonentity, which is the disintegration of that sprout, are conditioned phenomena. The exhaustion of the cause, like oil, is said to be the cause of the exhaustion of the effect, like a butter lamp. There is no doubt that this must be accepted as the position of the noble Nāgārjuna.
The destruction of the first moment in the second moment must be understood as the negation of an object of negation. Therefore, it is a negation, but not a non-affirming negation. It is an affirming negation because it does not merely negate the cause of destruction, but also implies a positive phenomenon that is the negation of that cause. The remaining proofs should be understood in detail from the commentary on the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā. This is a subtle reasoning of this system that has great import.
Second, even if one does not accept the foundation consciousness, one must accept that the habitual tendencies of virtuous and nonvirtuous actions are deposited and that the results arise from the maturation of those habitual tendencies. For example, the Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya says: "The maturation of the habitual tendencies of entities deposited in beginningless saṃsāra, the manifest clinging to entities..." And there are many similar statements.
Since it is not possible for there to be habitual tendencies without a basis for their placement, what is this basis? Just as those who accept the foundation consciousness assert that the foundation consciousness, which is the object of the afflicted mind's thought "I am," is the basis for the placement of habitual tendencies, this system also asserts that the object of the innate thought "I am" is the basis for the placement of habitual tendencies.
If you ask how it is that the Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya says that the mind-stream is the basis of habitual tendencies, the mere "I" is the continuum imputed in dependence on the mind, consciousness, so it is also called the mind-stream. If, however, the continuum of the mind is understood as the continuum of the mind's own similar type, then that continuum is also the basis for the formation of occasional habitual tendencies.
The way in which the latent tendencies of ignorance function is described in the Madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā: That which stains the mind-stream, makes it rigid, and follows it is a latent tendency. The ultimate limit of the afflictions, their habituation, and their root are synonymous with latent tendencies. Even though the afflictions have been abandoned through the uncontaminated path, they cannot be abandoned by śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. This is similar to the fact that even though oil and flowers have been removed, subtle qualities can still be observed in a vase or a piece of cloth that have come from their contact with those.
The same applies to other habitual tendencies, such as those of virtue and nonvirtue. At the time of the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing, although the objects to be abandoned on the path of seeing have ceased, the latent tendencies of the objects to be abandoned on the path of meditation must still be present. At that time, the mental consciousness is uncontaminated and is not adulterated by the habitual tendencies of dualistic appearances. Therefore, it is not reasonable for the latent tendencies to be present in its nature. The sense consciousnesses are not its support, and form is not its support either. Since the foundation consciousness is not accepted, there is no support for the latent tendencies. There is no fault, because the mere "I" is the support of the latent tendencies of the objects to be abandoned on the path of meditation. The same applies to other objects to be abandoned and their antidotes. If one understands the unique way of positing the person in this system, one will also understand that when the transcendent uncontaminated mind manifests in the mind streams of noble beings born in the three realms of infinite space, infinite consciousness, and nothing at all, there is no other worldly mind. Therefore, their transmigrations cease.
When an ārya born in the Peak of Existence manifests a stainless mind belonging to the level of Nothingness, he reverses the destinies of both the Peak of Existence and Nothingness, because the abode of that stainless mind cannot be either of those two destinies or the destiny of nirvāṇa. These arguments do not invalidate the Cittamātra position, because even though neither a contaminated nor a stainless mind is posited as an illustration of those destinies, it is still possible to posit those destinies. The opponent's position is that the nature of the destinies of those who have not entered the path and those in training is a neutral, unobscured state. As for those answers, how could someone like me be able to express them independently with regard to such great systems? However, I have spoken relying on the systems of the great charioteers who know how to posit the intention of the protector Nāgārjuna exactly as it is. If one extrapolates from those, it is clear that the remaining arguments proving the foundation consciousness do not invalidate this system either. This should be investigated by those of great intelligence, subtlety, and sharpness.
The meaning of the previous explanation that effects arise from ceased actions is now explained by way of an example: When a man sees a beautiful woman in a dream, even after he wakes up, he will still feel strong desire for her, even though she has ceased to exist. In the same way, even though actions that do not inherently exist have ceased, effects of those actions can still arise. This shows that effects arise from the disintegration of actions.
To explain this, the Sūtra on the Transference of Existence says: "Great King, it is like this. Suppose a man were to dream that he was having sex with a beautiful local woman. When he wakes up, he remembers the beautiful local woman. Great King, what do you think about this? Is the man who dreams that he is having sex with a beautiful local woman and who remembers the beautiful local woman when he wakes up wise? He replied, 'No, Blessed One. Why not? Blessed One, the beautiful woman in the dream does not exist and cannot be apprehended, so how could there be sex with her? Such a man would be miserable and distressed.' This is the teaching of the example.
The connection to the meaning is as follows: Great King, in the same way, a foolish ordinary person who lacks learning will, when seeing forms with the eye, become pleased and will then become attached to those forms that please him. When he is attached, he will develop desire. When he is desirous, he will manifest actions of body, speech, and mind that arise from desire, anger, and delusion.
When that action has been performed, it ceases. When it ceases, it does not abide in the eastern direction, and so on, up to: it does not abide in the intermediate directions. Thus it is said. Those who are not learned do not understand reality as it is taught through learning.
Clinging is clinging to truth.
As for the three types of actions that arise from attachment, they can be either virtuous or nonvirtuous. Actions that arise from aversion are nonvirtuous, and actions that arise from delusion can be either virtuous or nonvirtuous.
The first line of this verse refutes the idea that actions cease immediately upon being performed, and the rest of the verse refutes the idea that cessation is established by way of its own entity. Then, at some point in time, when the time of death has arrived, the propelling force of the karmic actions that are similar to that being's fortune has been exhausted. When the final moment of consciousness ceases, it is as if that being were awoken from sleep and were to face the same beautiful woman as in the dream. In other words, at the moment when the karmic actions that are similar to that being's fortune and that maintain the same type of aggregates in this life have been exhausted, and the final moment of consciousness in this life has ceased, the potential of the karmic actions that will ripen in the next life is activated. The mind then turns toward the karmic actions that will ripen in the next life, just as a passionate man who has just awoken from a dream will remember the beautiful woman in the dream and turn his mind toward her. However, this is not memory.
Thus, the final moment of consciousness ceases, and the first moment of consciousness that belongs to the next life arises. This may be in the realm of the gods, or it may be in the realm of the pretas. Thus, the final moment of consciousness is that of this life.
The first consciousness that belongs to the birth process is the consciousness of a god, and so on. The intermediate existence is not one of the six types of existence, so it is a consciousness of the birth existence. Although there is an intermediate existence between birth and death, it is not mentioned here. There are many such instances, so it is clear that the text intends to present the karmic results of birth and death as the main topic. Immediately after the first consciousness ceases, a stream of consciousness arises that is similar to the consciousness that will experience the karmic result.
Great King, there is no phenomenon that passes from this world to the next. Yet there is also the appearance of death and rebirth. Great King, the cessation of the final moment of consciousness is called death, and the arising of the first moment of consciousness is called rebirth.
Great King, when the final moment of consciousness ceases, it does not go anywhere.
When consciousness arises, it does not come from anywhere. Why is that? Because it is naturally void.
Great King, the final consciousness is empty of final consciousness. The death and transmigration is empty of death and transmigration.
Actions are empty of actions.
The first moment of consciousness is empty of the first moment of consciousness.
Birth is empty of birth, but the ripening of actions is also evident. This means that, having been reborn in a birth existence, one experiences the pleasant or unpleasant results of previous actions. The continuum of consciousness that experiences these results is born from the first moment of the birth mind. The conventional existence of death, transmigration, and birth and their ultimate nonexistence are explained by the reason that they are devoid of intrinsic existence. This is a qualification of the object of refutation and should be applied to the statement that the final moment of consciousness and so on is empty of itself. When this was taught, the Buddha said that actions do not expire, fearing that people might think that actions and their results do not exist.
This has two parts: (1) rebutting the objection that it would lead to an infinite regress of karmic effects and (2) rebutting the objection that it contradicts the scriptural statement that there is a foundation consciousness. ( 1) Rebutting the objection that it would lead to an infinite regress of karmic effects. One might object that if one accepts that karmic effects arise even though actions are not inherently produced and do not inherently cease, then it would follow that effects would arise again even from effects that have already arisen, and this would lead to the fault of an infinite regress. Just as, for example, although nonexistent, the hairs and so on that are seen by the eye affected by myodesopsia do not exist in the same way as other things, such as the horns of a donkey or the child of a barren woman, which are not seen, in the same way, although actions are not inherently established, one should understand that effects arise from actions that have not yet ripened and do not arise again from actions that have already ripened.
This example not only demonstrates the certainty of the results of actions, it also explains how the results of virtuous and nonvirtuous actions are distinct and separate. For example, someone with an eye disease may see floating hairs but not a donkey's horns. Therefore, pleasant karmic results do not arise from nonvirtuous actions, and unpleasant karmic results do not arise from virtuous actions. Thus, unpleasant karmic results, which are nonvirtuous, arise from black actions, and pleasant karmic results, which are virtuous, arise from white actions.
They see that the ripening of virtuous actions is pleasant and that it comes from virtuous actions.
Those who have the insight that there are no virtuous or nonvirtuous actions, and who realize that nothing is inherently established, will be liberated from saṃsāra. Therefore, the Victor did not want those who were ordinary beings and who were analyzing in detail the reasons for the various results of the various actions with valid reasoning to destroy the conventional truth by denying the existence of actions and their results. So he also forbade them to think about, that is, to analyze, actions and their results, saying, 'The results of actions are inconceivable!'
Fearing that such an approach might cause people to lose their certainty about the law of karma, this text employs many approaches to help people develop certainty about the law of karma. Understanding this, and with the view of emptiness helping to stabilize that certainty, make sure that your journey to the precious island is not in vain.
The second has three parts: (1) the actual meaning of the words that dispel a contradiction with scripture, (2) how the foundation consciousness is explained as being of a different nature from the mental consciousness, and (3) an example of how the foundation consciousness is taught in a manner that requires interpretation. ( 1) The actual meaning of the words that dispel a contradiction with scripture If it is possible to establish the connection between actions and their results even without a foundation consciousness, then why did the Lankāvatāra Sūtra and, by “and so on,” the Samdhinirmocana Sūtra and the Mahāyānasaṃgraha say that there is a foundation consciousness that is the basis of all the features of entities, the source of all seeds, the cause of the arising of all internal and external entities, like waves arising from the ocean? This is not the case. Rather, the foundation consciousness was taught to exist in order to guide those who need to be guided in that way. This shows that the foundation consciousness is taught in a manner that requires interpretation in our own system. The basis of intention for which the foundation consciousness was taught is to be understood as emptiness—the lack of inherent existence—alone.
The alaya is taught to be the natural expression because it is the basis of all things.
It is not only for a purpose that the foundation consciousness is taught to exist, but also that the person is taught to exist substantially. This is because the person is taught to exist in order to guide those who need to be guided. As it is said, "Monks, the five aggregates are a burden. The one who carries the burden is the person." This statement was made in response to those who believe that the person is a self-sufficient substance. In order to guide them, the Buddha did not teach that the person does not exist, but rather that the person who carries the burden exists. Although the word person does not actually appear in the statement, the meaning is that the person exists substantially.
To some disciples, he taught that there are no persons as substances, but only aggregates. He taught that the mind, the intellect, and consciousness are long habituated to faith, discipline, and so forth, and that they will go to higher realms in the future.
Those who hold the view that the path to the higher realms and liberation is true wonder how much they should accept. When the Buddha teaches that there is only the aggregates, he does so with the intention of countering their clinging to truth. All of these teachings were given with a specific intention.
What is the intended audience of this teaching? To answer this, it should be said that the teaching is intended for those who believe in the existence of the foundation consciousness and the person as a real entity.
The statement that these aggregates alone are true and exist in reality is made with the intention that those disciples who are not yet able to understand the very profound meaning as explained above will eventually come to understand it.
Those who have long been accustomed to the views of non-Buddhist traditions are unable to comprehend the profound nature of reality. As the Ratnāvalī says: 'There is no self, and there will not be; there is no mine, and there will not be.' Such words terrify the immature. When taught the nature of reality from the outset, they are frightened and think that the Buddha's teaching is like a precipice. They turn their backs on the teaching and do not enter it, so they do not accomplish anything great. Instead, they are taught the foundation consciousness and the true existence of the aggregates and so on, without being taught the ultimate profound truth from the outset. Relying on these teachings, they are able to refute the non-Buddhist systems and accomplish something great. Later, when they understand the meaning of the scriptures, they will abandon the belief in the existence of the foundation consciousness and so on. Thus, the teaching is only beneficial, not harmful.
With this process in mind, the Catuhsataka says: Whatever a person likes, that should be done first. A person who has fallen away is not a vessel for the sacred Dharma in any way.
For those who need to be taught the foundation consciousness, which is a separate entity from the six collections, the external must be refuted, so they are suitable vessels for the mere suchness that is empty of subject and object being different substances.
Even though one does not accept the foundation consciousness as explained above, one does not understand how to establish the connection between actions and their results. Therefore, it is said that one does not understand the very profound meaning.
Second, when the Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra in One Hundred Thousand Stanzas and other such texts teach the enumeration of consciousnesses, they explain the six collections of consciousnesses and do not explain more than that. Since there are many sūtras that do not teach the foundation consciousness, the venerable Maitreya, when commenting on the meaning of those sūtras, explained in the Madhyāntavibhāga, the Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, and the Dharmatāvibhāga the position that accepts the foundation consciousness and the position that explains that there are no external objects. In the Abhisamayālaṃkāra and the Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, he explained the position that does not accept the foundation consciousness and the position that does not refute external objects.
The great master Asaṅga also did not explain the intention of the Sublime Continuum in the Cittamātra tradition, but rather explained it in the Madhyamaka tradition. In the Commentary on the Sublime Continuum, he quotes a scriptural passage from the Abhidharma that is cited in the Compendium of the Mahāyāna as a proof of the foundation consciousness: "Although the tathāgata element exists in sentient beings as their essential nature, sentient beings do not know it."
As it is said: The element of beginningless time Is the abode of all phenomena. Because it exists, all beings And even nirvāṇa are attained. This is cited as a proof that all beings have the disposition of the true nature of phenomena. Therefore, this master also accepts that the foundation consciousness was taught as an expedient device for some disciples, its real intention being emptiness, and that it is not a separate entity from the six sense consciousnesses.
In the Bodhicittavivaraṇa, it is said that the foundation consciousness apprehends existence: Just as iron is quickly drawn by a magnet, Though it has no mind, it appears to have one. Likewise, the foundation consciousness, Though it is not real, is real in appearance. When it moves, going and coming, It apprehends existence. Just as a tree on the ocean shore Moves though it has no mind, So the foundation consciousness Moves in dependence on the body. How should one interpret this statement that the foundation consciousness apprehends existence? This statement that mind only is inherently established and that external objects do not exist is not definitive truth. It is said to dispel the fear of the immature at the teaching of emptiness. Yogācāras assert that the transformation of mind is inherently established and is established as the object of self-awareness. When this is refuted, the opponent may argue that if mind is not real, the movement of going from a previous life to this one and from this one to the next is not tenable. In response, this verse teaches that just as iron and wood move as if they had minds, the foundation consciousness moves with going and coming as if it were real, though it is not real. Therefore, this is not an assertion of the foundation consciousness established by its own characteristics as explained in other texts.
Even if one does not accept the foundation consciousness as established by its own characteristics, one might think that one accepts a foundation consciousness that is different in nature from the six sense consciousnesses, that is like an illusion, and that is the seed of all the phenomena of both affliction and purity. If one accepts such a foundation consciousness, one must accept that there are no external objects, and that appearances of form, sound, and so on are merely the ripening of the foundation consciousness's habitual tendencies. The same text says: Cognition realizes the cognized. Without the cognized, there is no cognition. Why then do you not accept that there is no cognizer and cognized? This is saying that since external objects and internal consciousnesses are equal in terms of whether they exist or not, if one does not exist, the other does not exist either. This is no different from the statement in this text that since the two truths are equal in terms of whether they exist or not, there is no validity in distinguishing between the existence or nonexistence of the two. Therefore, since the master does not accept a foundation consciousness that is a different entity from the mental consciousness, when he speaks of a foundation consciousness, he is referring to the mind in general, which is merely aware and clear. He is referring to the mental consciousness in particular. This is because the mental consciousness is the basis of all afflictions and purity.
The Madhyamakahṛdaya also refutes the literal existence of the foundation consciousness, and the master Jñānagarbha also does not accept the foundation consciousness because he accepts external objects.
There are two types of Cittamātra: those who refute external objects and those who do not. Among those who refute external objects, there are two types: those who accept the foundation consciousness and those who do not. The master Kamalaśīla, who does not accept external objects, also says that the mental consciousness alone has the ability to connect to another life. He cites the Abhidharmakosha: “The severance and connection, the detachment, the decline, the death and transmigration, and the birth are asserted to be mental consciousness alone.” This clearly shows that the great master Śāntarakṣita also does not accept the foundation consciousness. Abhayākaragupta is similar.
In other Mahayana scriptures, the term 'foundational consciousness' is used, but without a clear identification of what is meant by the term. When the meaning is examined, it appears that the [Yogācāra] tradition does not accept a separate entity from the six sense consciousnesses. Since that tradition appears to accept external objects, the term 'foundational consciousness' is applied to the mental consciousness. Although it is necessary to resolve these issues in detail, I have not written about them here for fear of being too wordy.
Third, not only did the Buddha teach the foundation consciousness and so on at first in order to guide disciples, but he also taught the self and mine. For example, just as the Buddha, who is free from the view of the transitory collection and its habitual tendencies, has abandoned all thoughts of 'I' and 'mine,' he nevertheless taught 'I' and 'mine' in order to help worldly beings understand the meaning of the Dharma. Similarly, although things do not exist inherently, he taught that they do exist inherently as a provisional meaning in order to help worldly beings gradually understand suchness.
If one summarizes, it is as stated in the following: "I" and "mine" are said to exist, but even though it appears that there are such thoughts, the absence of thoughts is the definitive meaning. Similarly, the teaching that phenomena are inherently established appears to be the intention of the Buddha, but the absence of phenomena being so is the definitive meaning.
The way to engage in conventional presentations in accordance with the world is also described in the Verses in Accordance with the Eastern Mountain: If the guides of the world did not engage in accordance with the world, no one would know the nature of the Buddha and the Dharma. They know the aggregates, elements, and sense sources to be of one nature, yet they teach the three realms. This is engaging in accordance with the world. They teach the Dharma, which is without names, with names that cannot be conceived. This is engaging in accordance with the world. They teach the absence of entities while abiding in the nature of the Buddha. There is no entity here that does not exist. This is engaging in accordance with the world. They do not see meaning and nonmeaning, cessation and the ultimate meaning. They teach the supreme speech. This is engaging in accordance with the world. They are without destruction and without birth, and they are equal to the realm of phenomena. They teach the eons of destruction. This is engaging in accordance with the world. They do not perceive the nature of beings in the three times. They teach the realm of beings. This is engaging in accordance with the world.
The last verse of these teaches the selflessness of persons, the absence of intrinsic existence of sentient beings, and the remaining verses teach the selflessness of phenomena, the absence of intrinsic existence of things and nonthings. The Blaze of Reasoning explains that the Eastern Mountain School gradually split off from the Great Saṅgha School. Therefore, it appears that there is a scriptural collection of the hearers that teaches the absence of intrinsic existence of phenomena in a very clear way.
The second part, a specific refutation of the Cittamātra system, has three sections: refutation of the intrinsic existence of consciousness without external reality, refutation of the valid cognition that proves the intrinsic existence of the dependent nature, and showing that the word “only” in the statement that there is mind only does not negate external reality. The first section has two parts: the presentation of the opponent’s view and the refutation of that view. The first part is as follows. Unable to accept the Madhyamaka view as presented above, and claiming that it is not the intention of the Victor, those who posit their own view by expressing their own thoughts state the following as a preliminary to their own system. The bodhisattva on the sixth bhūmi, who dwells in the perfection of wisdom and meditates on it, realizes the suchness of reality through reasoning. He realizes and sees the suchness of reality without superimposing the distinction of subject and object. This should be applied to the statement “he realizes the suchness of reality as consciousness only.”
Since there are no external forms, they also understand that the mind and mental factors are external forms, that is, that they are merely dependently originated phenomena without any referent. Therefore, they are said to have realized the suchness of consciousness only.
How do bodhisattvas understand suchness in this way? Because bodhisattvas, through the reasoning that will be explained later about the arising of form and so on from the maturation of internal habitual tendencies, see that there is no apprehended object that is a different substance from the mind, and they realize that the three realms of existence are merely consciousness. They thus cultivate familiarity with the suchness of the emptiness of duality for a long time. Through such familiarity, they directly perceive the suchness that is the mere thing inexpressible in words, the emptiness of duality, by means of self-awareness. Therefore, through this process of familiarization, the bodhisattvas on the sixth bhūmi understand the suchness of consciousness only.
If these are merely cognitions without external objects, then how can a cognition that has the aspect of an external object arise without an external object?" One might ask. The answer is: "Just as the great ocean, which is the support of the waves, is stirred by the wind, and the waves, which are like a body that has been found, are perceived as running about, in the same way, from the so-called foundation consciousness, which is the seed of all inner and outer things, a mere consciousness, which is the impure dependent nature, arises. This consciousness is the maturation of the habitual tendencies that have been deposited in the foundation consciousness by the ceasing of attachment and so forth, or faith and so forth. The childish perceive this consciousness as if it were a subject and object that are separate and distinct. But there is not the slightest bit of a subject that is a different entity from consciousness."
This is similar to the way that the proponents of Īśvara and other such causes say, "A cow is the cause of cows, just as a crystal is the cause of water, and a bīlaṅga branch is the cause of branches. Īśvara is the cause of all embodied beings." In the same way that the proponents of Īśvara and other such causes say that Īśvara is the creator of beings, the proponents of the all-ground consciousness also say that the all-ground consciousness is the support of all the objects that are observed by consciousness and is the seed of everything.
The difference is that the Īśvara is permanent, but the foundation consciousness is impermanent. Therefore, those who have cultivated the views of the tīrthikas in many previous lives are tamed through the explanation of the foundation consciousness.
If one wonders whether the Cittamātra should accept the absence of form and the other sense objects and the physical sense faculties, as stated in the commentary, or whether they should accept the absence of form and the other sense objects without qualifying them as “separate from consciousness,” as stated in the commentary on the line “The eye faculty is understood to be a physical sense faculty,” and in the commentary on the line “The eye faculty that is separate from consciousness does not exist,” then although both qualifications and nonqualifications are found in this commentary, if one takes into account the many instances in which the qualification is used in the context of Cittamātra, such as in the following: What is the seed of the environment? It is the seed of the unconscious material elements. And in the commentary on the Sūtra of Dependent Origination, where the “name” in the statement “Name and form are established through the conditions of the ālaya” is explained as the other four aggregates and form is explained as the elements and the derivative form, and where it is explained that although these do not exist in the formless realm, they do exist in the other two realms, it appears that all the conventional usages of form, sound, and so on, as stated in the Cittamātra context, cannot be used as they are conventionally designated. However, no Buddhist in India appears to have said, “This philosophical system is good,” while seeing that such conventional usages cannot be used.
The meaning of the name 'proponents of internal objects' is that objects of knowledge are form, sound, and so forth. They do not assert these to be external but rather say that they are internal entities of consciousness.
If the Cittamātra accept form, sound, and so on, then refuting their external status would be a mere quibble about words, for they posit these very appearances of form and so on as external. This is similar to the Madhyamaka refuting the intrinsic existence of form and so on, while still positing form and so on. For they posit these very appearances of intrinsically existent form and so on as intrinsically existent. So arguing about whether they exist or not would be a quibble about words. Since these appear to be major difficulties for both philosophical systems, it is not only the Madhyamaka tradition that is difficult. In this Cittamātra system as well, if external objects are refuted, form and so on would also become nonexistent. And if form and so on are posited, external objects would also have to be posited. These are difficult points, but I am afraid of writing too much, so I will not elaborate.
Since the presentation of the scriptures is well known to be as explained above, it must be accepted that the dependent nature has an intrinsically real nature. For the following reason: because it is accepted that the imaginary nature of the apprehended and apprehender is the cause, or basis, of the entire network of conceptual thoughts that apprehend it as a different substance.
The mistaken perception of a rope as a snake does not arise in the absence of a rope.
Just as the illusion of a vase and so on does not arise in a place such as space, which is without earth and so on, similarly, if there were no external object, what could be the cause of the mistaken cognition that perceives blue and so on as external? Therefore, it is necessary to accept the existence of the impure dependent nature, which is the cause of the mistaken cognition that perceives the external, and which appears as the duality of subject and object that are different substances. This appearance is the cause of both the bondage and the liberation of the afflictions and purity.
According to the views of both the Cittamātra and Madhyamaka schools, if there is something that appears to sentient beings and is taught to be empty of the object of that appearance, then realizing that emptiness can be a path. However, sentient beings who are happy with their natural state do not take the path of realizing emptiness, which refutes the object of their clinging to truth. Instead, they prove another emptiness to be true. This is a fruitless effort, for it does not act as an antidote to any of the subtle or coarse clinging to truth that has been present since beginningless time.
In this way, the imaginary nature, which is the object of clinging to the existence of the dependent nature that appears as dual, does not exist. Therefore, one correctly sees that the basis is empty of that object of negation. The remaining basis of emptiness and the emptiness itself are correctly understood to exist truly. Thus, one correctly understands the meaning of emptiness.
The opponent here is the explanation in the Bodhisattvabhūmi and the Madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā, which explains the meaning of the statement "Whatever is not in whatever" as above. The commentary on the statement "Whatever is not in whatever" in the commentary on the Uttaratantra is completely different from the above two and is an explanation in the manner of Madhyamaka, but I will not write it here for fear of being too wordy.
The dependent nature arises from its own habitual tendencies alone, without any external apprehended object.
It exists by its very nature, and according to this system, it is the ultimate nature, not the object of any conceptual elaboration of language or thought. For internal and external verbal expression is not the direct apprehension of its aspect.
In brief, the dependent nature has three features: it arises without external objects, it exists inherently, and it is not an object of all elaborations on the ultimate level.
Since the cause of the imaginary exists within the category of inherently existent entities, it is not distinct from the three features.
"Dependent nature exists" does not mean that it merely exists, but that it exists in a special way. As Ācārya Sthiramati says: "Unreal imagination exists" means that it exists by its own nature, which is the remainder of the sentence. This distinction is important and will be explained below.
The second has two parts: (1) an extensive explanation of the refutation and (2) a conclusion to the refutation. The first has three parts: (1) refutation of the example for the intrinsic existence of consciousness without external reality, (2) refutation of the point that consciousness devoid of external reality arises due to the power of latent propensities, and (3) showing that the refutation does not contradict the practice of repulsiveness. The first has two parts: (1) refutation of the example of a dream and (2) refutation of the example of seeing falling hairs. The first has three parts: (1) the example of a dream does not establish the intrinsic existence of consciousness, (2) the example of a dream does not establish the nonexistence of external reality in the waking state, and (3) the example of a dream establishes that all things are false.
The Cittamātra says, "For example, when one is sleeping in a very small room and dreams of a herd of wild elephants, the elephants are not in that room at all. Therefore, just as in a dream, even though there are no external objects, one must definitely accept that consciousness is intrinsically real." To show that this is also without essence, we say: "That example should be examined."
What is it that should be examined? When a mind that has the appearance of a herd of intoxicated elephants is established by its own characteristics even in a dream, it does not exist in my system, just as there are no elephants in the dream. This is because it is unarisen.
If consciousness is not established by its own characteristics, then there is no example established for both of us, and so consciousness does not exist without external reality.
Here, it is not that the cognition that is the subject is shown to be nonexistent, just as the elephant in a dream is nonexistent. Rather, it must definitely be accepted that there is no intrinsically established cognition. As explained above, the Cittamātra accept the dependent nature that lacks external reality, but this is the dependent nature that is intrinsically established. In the summary of these refutations, it is said: In brief, just as there is no object of cognition, there is no cognition either. The commentary on this says: "The cognition that has the aspect of the object of cognition should be understood to be not produced by way of its own entity."
Moreover, when refuting such a type of reasoning in both the root text and the commentary, there are many instances of applying qualifications to the object of refutation. Furthermore, the great master himself said, "Why did you say that mind is born from ignorance and karma?" This statement that ignorance gives rise to karmic formations, which in turn give rise to consciousness, is also the master's own position. Therefore, there is no room for doubt among those with intelligence that this is the master's position. Therefore, all instances of equating the existence or nonexistence of knowable objects and consciousness should be understood in terms of the qualifications of the object of refutation.
If consciousness is not mistaken in dreams, then when one wakes up one will not remember the experiences of the dream later on." This is an argument that assumes that if consciousness is not established by its own essence, then it is completely nonexistent.
This argument is also untenable. If the existence of the mind in a dream were proven by the memory of the experience of a dream upon awakening, then the external objects that appear in the dream, such as the elephant, would also exist in the same way as the mind. Why? Just as you have a memory of the subject, thinking, 'I saw this in a dream when I was awake,' the object also exists. In the same way, you have a memory of the object, thinking, 'I saw this object in a dream,' and so the object also exists. Therefore, you must accept that either the object or the consciousness does not exist.
In our own system, there is also memory of the subject and object of a dream. So how should we understand the existence or nonexistence of these two? In the commentary, there is an explanation of two things: memory of the experience of a dream and memory of the experience of the object of a dream. When an elephant appears in a dream, for example, the visual consciousness that perceives the reflection of the elephant does not experience the elephant. However, there is an experience of the object in relation to the reflection. Similarly, in a dream, there is no experience of an elephant, but there is an experience of the object that appears as an elephant. So, even though it is said that the object is remembered, it is the experience of that object that is remembered.
The distinction between perception and experience is not necessary in most cases like this one. Thus, since it is impossible to posit a dependent nature that is empty of external reality and established by its own characteristics, there is no possible direct example. In the case of proving the existence of past and future lives, there is no direct example, but it can be proved by other means of formulation. Since there is no such example in this case, one should understand that the refutation of the Cittamātra is extremely powerful.
Second, if the forms of elephants and so on exist in a dream, then the visual consciousness apprehending them would also have to exist in the dream. But this is not reasonable. When one is asleep, the visual consciousness is not possible because of being disturbed by sleep. Therefore, the form of an elephant and so on is not apprehended by the eye sense faculty, and only the mental consciousness exists. Therefore, there are no external sense objects of form at all. Rather, the mental consciousness merely appears in the aspect of the external object, and the conception of it as external is unavoidable.
If you say that just as consciousness arises in a dream without external objects, the same is true in the waking state, this is not so. Even if we grant that the previous example is not established, the example of a dream does not establish that consciousness exists without external objects in the waking state. This is not so, because mental consciousness does not arise in dreams. This means that even if we grant that visual forms do not exist in dreams, mental consciousness without them does not arise inherently even in dreams. Thus, the combination of the absence of external objects and the inherent existence of mental consciousness is not a suitable example.
Just as the external object in a dream is not produced, so too is the mental consciousness not produced by its own nature. Therefore, just as when one is awake and sees a form, the three—the eye, the form, and the mind—come together, in the same way, when one perceives an object in a dream, the three come together, as one can observe with the mind.
Just as in a dream there are no eyes and no visual objects, there is also no visual consciousness that is produced by these two. Therefore, the eyes, visual objects, and mind of a dream are all false.
Just as the three [sense faculties] of the ear and so forth are not inherently produced, so too are the remaining three [sense faculties] of the eye and so forth.
The term and so on includes sound and ear consciousness up to mind, the mental element, and mental consciousness. The four from the ear sense faculty up to the body sense faculty, the four from the sound source up to the tactile object source, and the four from ear consciousness up to mental consciousness are like the three of the eye sense faculty explained earlier. In dreams, they do not exist but appear as such, so they are false. The three of mind appear in dreams but are naturally nonexistent and appear as such, so they are false. Therefore, those who claim that the existence of sense consciousness in dreams is the position of this master and then refute it are extremely coarse in their understanding. As the saying goes, "The sun of refutation rises before the dawn of the opponent's position," so this should be cast far away. Some Tibetan scholars who are proud of their learning consider such a philosophical system to be the position of a great bodhisattva, a master of learning. Without understanding even the coarse systems of those who are known to them, they consider those to be fields for accumulating nonmerits. It appears that they are connecting many beings to nonmerits, so be careful.
Here, the Cittamātra present their own position with the statement "If in a dream..." When the master Bhāviveka responds to this by saying that the example is not established, he says that there is a form that is included in the sensory domain of mental phenomena and that is apprehended by mental consciousness. Therefore, consciousness does not exist without an object. This is not correct, because in a dream the three elements are impossible in any way. If one accepts this in order to refute the opponent's position, then the example of a dream is pointless. This is because the example is not false, and therefore it is impossible to demonstrate that the actual meaning that is derived from the example is false. This means that the three elements of object, sense faculty, and consciousness are not established by way of their own nature even in a dream.
The point to be made is that it is not reasonable for there to be a form of the sensory domain of mental phenomena that is other than consciousness, and that it is not contradictory for such a form to exist even in a dream. Therefore, since Bhāviveka clearly accepts that such a form exists inherently, this should be taken as the reason for the nonexistence of such a form.
If, in order to dispel the Cittamātra position that there is no external form, one were to accept that such form exists inherently, then there would be no point in the Mādhyamika using the example of a dream to prove the lack of true existence.
The dream is not a false object, for it is established by its own characteristics. The example is what arises from that. It is impossible to establish the falsity of the object that is exemplified by that. As long as intrinsic existence is not refuted, there is no pervasion of the sign that establishes the lack of truth in the example. Therefore, the earlier response from our own system that all appearances in dreams are not intrinsically established is excellent.
If you ask whether our own system accepts that the forms that appear clearly in dreams are phenomena-source forms, the answer is no. In dreams, there are no sense consciousnesses, so the appearances of the five sense objects appear only to the mental consciousness. Therefore, although the five sense sources such as form cannot be posited there, the appearance of a skeleton that appears clearly to the mind alone is similar to a phenomenon-source form. Thus, it is a phenomenon-source form. Moreover, it is an imaginary form among the five types of form. This should be understood in relation to many such cases.
Since the three—the object, the sense faculty, and the consciousness—are all unreal in a dream, the fact that phenomena are unreal can be established by means of the fact that dreams are unreal. Therefore, even when awake, all phenomena are established as lacking inherent existence.
Just as the objects, sense faculties, and consciousnesses in a dream are false, so too are the entities in the waking state false. Therefore, the mind does not exist inherently. Similarly, the objects of the sense faculties, such as forms, do not exist, and the sense faculties do not arise inherently. Therefore, as the sūtras say: Just as one perceives illusory beings, They appear but are not real in reality. The Sugata taught that phenomena are like illusions and dreams. And: The beings in existence are like dreams. No one is born or dies here. No sentient beings, humans, or life force is found. These phenomena are like bubbles and plantain trees. And so forth.
"No one is born, and so forth" should be applied with the qualification "in reality" as in "in reality, they are not real." These sūtras explain that all phenomena are unreal in reality, using the example of a dream. This is appropriate for the Madhyamaka but not for Cittamātra, so it is said to be a good explanation.
Therefore, just as in this world, even though there is the sleep of ignorance, there are some who are awake, who are free from the sleep of the ordinary person, and who, although not born, see things in their dreams due to the sleep of ignorance, and who perceive the three things as real, so long as they are not free from sleep, so long as they are not awake, so long as they perceive the three things, the object, the sense faculty, and the consciousness, as real.
When one awakens from sleep, the three elements of a dream do not exist. Similarly, when the sleep of ignorance is exhausted and completely eradicated, the buddhas perceive the dharmadhātu directly. Since the three elements do not exist for them, there is no consciousness without external reality.
In the perspective of the vision of the nature as it is, the three appearances do not appear, and in the perspective of the vision of the nature as it is in all its extensiveness, there is no appearance of the subject itself due to the influence of the latent tendencies of ignorance. However, the appearances that appear due to the influence of the mistaken consciousness of other persons appear to the Buddha in the perspective of appearing to those persons, and thus the Buddha knows them.
Second, one might say, 'Since those with eye disease perceive nonexistent floating hairs and so forth, consciousness exists inherently, even without external reality.' That is also untenable.
Why is this? When a person with an eye affected by myodesopsia sees floating hairs due to the power of the myodesopsia, from the perspective of that person's perception, both the eye consciousness and the object that appears as floating hairs—the floating hairs—exist.
If one considers the vision of someone with clear sight, who does not have such an eye disease, both the appearance of the hairs and the consciousness perceiving them are false and nonarisen, for it is difficult to ascertain that there is a consciousness without an object that is merely an appearance. This is something that must definitely be accepted.
If, on the other hand, a cognition that is not an object of perception, but is naturally established in the form of a hair, were to arise in someone with eye disease, then the eye of a person without eye disease who was in the same place as the person with eye disease and who was looking at the same place where the person with eye disease saw the hair would also see the hair. This is because the absence of the object is the same in both cases.
If a cognition that is inherently established arises, it would be inconsistent for the perception of such a cognition to arise in someone with diseased vision but not in someone without diseased vision, since the two are equal in not having such a visual defect. This is because the cognition would be independent of the diseased vision and could therefore arise without any connection.
Since there is no such appearance of floating hairs to those without eye disease, there is no such consciousness that is inherently established and independent of external reality.
The second has three parts: refuting the production and nonproduction of consciousness perceiving objects from the ripening and nonripening of habitual tendencies, again refuting the existence of consciousness without external objects, and showing that the refutation of Cittamātra tenets is not undermined by scripture. The first has two parts: stating the opponent's position and refuting that position. Stating the opponent's position First, if the existence of the object, such as the appearance of falling hairs, were the cause of the production of consciousness, then even those without eye disease would perceive falling hairs. But this is not the case. What is the case, then? The ripening and nonripening of habitual tendencies previously deposited are the cause of the production and nonproduction of consciousness. Therefore, only those individuals who have the ripening of habitual tendencies deposited by a previous consciousness having the aspect of falling hairs will perceive falling hairs.
When those without cataracts see objects, the potential of the mind to perceive floating hairs is not activated. Therefore, those without cataracts do not have the thought that perceives floating hairs. This is not because the object of knowledge, the floating hairs, is absent, but rather because the potential of the mind to perceive floating hairs is not activated.
The second has three parts: refutation of the essential existence of present power, refutation of the essential existence of future power, and refutation of the essential existence of past power. Refutation of the essential existence of present power Suppose that power existed essentially. Then it would be possible that consciousness arises or does not arise from the ripening or non-ripening of that power. However, since that power does not exist essentially, this is not established.
How is it that they do not establish it? When one considers the potential, it must be related to either a present consciousness or a past or future consciousness. First, it is not possible that the potential is inherently established in a present, arisen consciousness. Nor is it possible that the potential exists in a future consciousness that has not yet arisen.
If, on the other hand, one asserts that the potential exists in the present consciousness, then the consciousness and the potential would be simultaneous. In that case, the sixth case would be used to refer to the potential and the potential-possessor, as in the phrase "potential consciousness." Since these two cannot be different entities, it is not reasonable for the potential consciousness to exist as a potential. If it did, the effect would have no cause other than itself, and when the sprout has arisen, the seed would not have disintegrated.
When the fifth case is used, as in the statement "consciousness arises from the potential," it is not reasonable for consciousness to arise from a potential that is simultaneous with it, because the effect would already exist at the time of the cause. Thus, there is no potential that is the cause of present consciousness.
If the potential exists in consciousness that has not yet arisen, then when one says "the potential of consciousness," the potential is the basis of the distinction and consciousness is the distinguished property. In this case, future consciousness that has not yet arisen cannot be taught in the form of an affirmative statement, "This is consciousness," nor can it be taught in the form of a negative statement, "This is not consciousness," which is established by its own nature.
When future consciousness does not yet exist as present consciousness, how could one say, 'This potential is the potential of this consciousness'? One could not.
Thus, without a special consciousness, there is no capacity that is qualified by it. Otherwise, it would follow that even the son of a barren woman would have such a capacity.
If consciousness arises from potential, one might think that the potential of this consciousness is this, and that this consciousness will arise from this potential. In this way, they become a special subject and object. In the world, one might say, 'Cook the rice!' or 'Weave a cloth from this thread!' In thinking about the future rice and cloth, one says this. The Treasury of Knowledge also says: There are three types of entry into the womb: universal monarchs, pratyekabuddhas, and buddhas. In thinking about the consciousness that will enter the womb of a future universal monarch, one speaks of the potential of consciousness. This is also meaningless. If something exists at some point, its effect will arise later. But it is certain that something that never arises, like the childless woman's son, or uncompounded space, will never arise in the present or in the future. Therefore, if there were inherently established potential, consciousness could arise. But since future consciousness does not exist inherently at any time, there is no potential to produce it. Then, like the childless woman's son, there is no inherently established potential to produce consciousness. This consciousness will not arise.
In many contexts, the Madhyamika refutes the idea that the arising of a sprout is established by its own characteristics. They argue that if a sprout can arise even though it does not exist at the time of the seed, then even the horns of a rabbit could arise. The key point of this absurd consequence is that if a sprout established by its own characteristics does not exist at one time, it must be nonexistent at all times. It would be no different from a nonexistent object. This is why it is said that if a sprout can arise even though it does not exist at the time of the seed, then even the horns of a rabbit could arise. This is not a refutation of the idea that a sprout can arise even though it does not exist at the time of the seed. This reasoning also applies to cooked rice and so on. If things were to arise inherently, then cooked rice and so on would have to be completely nonexistent.
Moreover, if consciousness is posited in dependence upon the existence of a potential, and the potential is posited in dependence upon consciousness, then they would be established in mutual dependence. If that is accepted, then the wise ones, who possess supreme knowledge, have said that consciousness is not established by its own nature.
In the commentary, it is said that things that are established in dependence, such as long and short, or this side and the other side, are imputedly existent and do not have an inherently established existence. Therefore, one should understand that we do not refute the existence of such things in general, but only their inherent existence. If one speaks in this way, one will follow our way of speaking. In this way, consciousness does not have the ability to bring about future effects.
Now, to show that it is also without power over the past, the text says: If the consciousness that has arisen and is ceasing plants a special potency in the form of a latent tendency in the foundation consciousness for the sake of a result that is concordant with it, and if the future consciousness arises from the maturation of the potency of the ceased consciousness, then a future consciousness would arise from a potency that is inherently established and separate. Why? Because, according to you, the successive moments in a continuum are inherently different from each other.
Moreover, from the root tanu meaning 'to expand' the suffix is added, and this becomes tanu 'to extend'. This refers to the continuous flow of a river. When cause and effect are connected and flow in a continuous stream, the process of birth and death occurs without interruption. This refers to the momentary formations that are the appropriators of the three times. The continuum is not merely the uninterrupted succession of earlier and later moments. Rather, it is that which has parts, the momentary material entities that are the parts of the continuum. The momentary material entities that are the parts of the continuum are called 'possessors of the continuum' because they are parts of the continuum. The continuum is called 'appropriator' of the momentary material entities that are its parts and members because the parts and members of the continuum are parts of the continuum. For example, a pot is the appropriator of its spout, neck, and so on.
Those earlier and later moments are mutually different from each other, and the opponent accepts that they are different in the sense of being established by their own characteristics. Thus, one thing arises from the power of another thing that is inherently established.
If you think that this is not a problem because it is desired, then all things would arise from all other things.
Even though the successive moments of the continuum of material entities are inherently different from each other, the continuum is not different in the earlier and later moments. It is one and the same. Therefore, there is no fault of everything arising from everything. This is the main response to the absurd consequence of other-arising.
If a single continuum could be established for distinct entities that are inherently established as separate, then this would be acceptable. However, since a single continuum has not been established, a single continuum is something that must be proven. Why? Because it is not reasonable for there to be a single continuum, or a single stream, between entities that are inherently established as separate. For example, the beings that are included in the continuums of Maitreya and Upagupta are different from each other, and so they are not included in a single continuum. Similarly, it is not reasonable for entities that are inherently established as separate to be included in a single continuum.
The Mīmāṃsaka might respond that rice seeds and rice sprouts are of the same continuum, whereas rice seeds and barley sprouts are not of the same continuum, so everything does not arise from everything. However, this response cannot overcome the flaw. The key point is that it comes down to the acceptance of otherness that is established by its own characteristics. This is made clear by the single-purpose argument that the opponent uses, which is not directed at otherness in general, but at otherness that is established by its own characteristics. The opponent does not understand the qualification that is added to the statement "otherness that is established by its own characteristics." So, instead of explaining why the glorious Candrakīrti said that this response cannot overcome the flaw, the opponent makes up a false explanation. This is a betrayal of the correct philosophical system.
Second, there are two: (1) stating the other's system and (2) refuting that system. First, the Cittamātra, thinking that they will accomplish their desired goal by primarily stating their own system, say: "When the eye consciousness ceases, it immediately deposits its habitual tendencies—its potential to produce a subsequent consciousness—in the foundation consciousness. Later, when those habitual tendencies ripen, they produce an eye consciousness that is in the aspect of the previous consciousness.
The world, due to ignorance, thinks that the eye sense faculty is a physical sense faculty, but there is no eye sense faculty that is different from the eye consciousness. The same should be applied to the remaining physical sense faculties.
The latent tendencies that are the cause of the arising of visual consciousness are its causal condition, and the eye sense faculty is the dominant condition of visual consciousness.
Here, the statement that the eye sense faculty is the direct cause of visual consciousness is intended to refer to the occasion when the latent tendencies for the arising of visual consciousness have matured. It does not refer to any and all eye sense faculties.
Moreover, the Madhyāntavibhāga says: Objects, sentient beings, and the self Are the appearances that arise in consciousness. They are unreal. This statement that consciousness arises in the appearance of objects such as form and sentient beings as the five sense faculties refers to the foundation consciousness. Also, the master Sthiramati explains that the physical sense faculties are the focal objects of the foundation consciousness. Therefore, Cittamātra proponents of the foundation consciousness assert that the foundation consciousness appears as the physical sense faculties, such as the eye faculty.
Having shown that there are no sense faculties such as the eye faculty that are separate from consciousness, the following is said to show that there are no external forms that are separate from consciousness either: In this world, the five types of cognition that arise from the five sense faculties do not understand that the appearance of blue and so forth is merely the ripening of the seeds of consciousness that have been deposited in the alaya. Instead, people cling to the appearance of blue and so forth in their minds as being external objects.
